`` 2 Hearts '' is a song recorded by Australian singer Kylie Minogue for her tenth studio album , X -LRB- 2007 -RRB- .
It was written and produced by Jim Eliot and Mima Stilwell of the British electropop group Kish Mauve .
Initially , the song was released on 9 November 2007 by Parlophone .
The song was Minogue 's first commercial single since she was diagnosed with breast cancer in May 2005 .
After the announcement , Minogue took a hiatus between 2005 and 2006 to recover from her illness .
The song is a cover version of a track originally recorded by Kish Mauve .
Musically , the song is a pop rock-oriented song , which features elements of glam rock and Rock and roll .
The song features instrumentation of electric guitars , guitars , drums , keyboards and piano riffs .
The song also features `` whooo '' 's towards the singles chorus .
Upon its release , `` 2 Hearts '' received mixed reviews from music critics .
The song was praised for its departure of musical content and the song 's strength , however the song received criticism for the song 's production and felt it did n't live up to expectations .
Commercially , the song was successful worldwide .
The song managed to top the spot in her native Australia and Spain , while it peaked inside the top ten in countries Italy , Sweden , United Kingdom , Norway and Switzerland .
Though the song was released in North America , the song did not manage to chart on any component Billboard charts , but did chart in Canada .
The music video for `` 2 Hearts '' was directed by Dawn Shadforth and filmed at Shepperton Studios in London , England .
It features Minogue performing the song on a stage , where she danced on a piano and featured the band playing along with the song .
Additionally , the song was featured on three of Minogue 's tours .
The song was first performed on her KylieX2008 Tour , where she played as an ` erotic bellboy ' .
The stage featured a green set , with a gigantic skull behind her .
The song was also featured on her North American tour For You , for Me , where it was featured in the middle of the setlist .
The song was then added to the setlist of her Aphrodite World Tour , where it was performed in Japan only .