A Perfect Circle is an American rock supergroup formed in 1999 by guitarist Billy Howerdel and Tool vocalist Maynard James Keenan .
A Perfect Circle has released three albums : their debut Mer de Noms in 2000 , a follow up , Thirteenth Step in 2003 , and an album of cover songs titled Emotive in 2004 .
Shortly after Emotives release , the band went into hiatus while Keenan returned to Tool and starting up solo work in the form of the band Puscifer , and Howerdel releasing a solo album , Keep Telling Myself It 's Alright , under the moniker Ashes Divide .
Band activity was sporadic in the coming years ; the band reformed in 2010 , and played live shows on and off between 2010 and 2013 , but fell into inactivity after the release of their greatest hits album , Three Sixty , and a live album box set , A Perfect Circle Live : Featuring Stone and Echo in late 2013 .
However , in 2017 , the band returned to touring and announced plans to record and release a fourth studio album under a new record label , BMG Rights Management , between late 2017 and early 2018 .
Prone to downtime due to Keenan 's other musical commitments , the band has featured a variety of musicians in the rest of the band 's role throughout its alternating periods of activity and inactivity .
The original incarnation of the band included Paz Lenchantin on bass , Troy Van Leeuwen on guitar , and Josh Freese on drums , though Primus drummer Tim Alexander had briefly stood in as a drummer prior to Freese in the band 's initial live shows prior to releasing any material .
Band collaborator and producer Danny Lohner and Marilyn Manson bassist Jeordie White were also members for a short period in the early 2000s .
The band 's current lineup features former Smashing Pumpkins guitarist James Iha , bassist Matt McJunkins , and drummer Jeff Friedl , the latter two also being contributors to the related Puscifer and Ashes Divide projects .
Despite the varied cast and numerous lineup changes , the stylistic content of the songs has remained consistent with Howerdel as music composer , and Keenan penning the lyrics and vocal melodies .
The band 's studio albums have been generally well received critically and commercially , with their three studio albums selling 4 million copies collectively as of 2005 .