A Thousand Suns is the fourth studio album by American rock band Linkin Park .
It was released on September 8 , 2010 , by Warner Bros. .
Records .
The album was written by the band and was produced by Linkin Park vocalist Mike Shinoda and Rick Rubin , who worked together to produce the band 's previous studio album Minutes to Midnight -LRB- 2007 -RRB- .
Recording sessions for A Thousand Suns took place at NRG Recording Studios in North Hollywood , California from 2008 until early 2010 .
A Thousand Suns is a multi-concept album dealing with human fears such as nuclear warfare .
The band has said the album is a drastic departure from their previous work ; they experimented on different and new sounds .
Shinoda told MTV the album references numerous social issues and blends human ideas with technology .
The title is a reference to Hindu Sanskrit scripture , a line of which was first popularized in 1945 by J. Robert Oppenheimer , who described the atomic bomb as being `` as bright as a thousand suns '' .
It also appears in a line from the first single of the album , `` The Catalyst '' .
`` The Catalyst '' was sent to radio and released to digital music retailers on August 2 , 2010 .
`` The Catalyst '' peaked at the Billboard Alternative Songs and Rock Songs charts .
Three more singles were released to promote the album : `` Waiting for the End '' , `` Burning in the Skies '' and `` Iridescent '' .
`` The Catalyst '' and `` Waiting for the End '' were certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- .
Linkin Park promoted the album through the A Thousand Suns World Tour from October 2010 to September 2011 .
Upon release , the album polarized critics and fans .
The band 's fanbase divided over their new sound , splitting them into `` love-it versus hate-it groups '' according to one reviewer .
Despite this , the album has been a commercial success , debuting at number one on over ten charts .
It was certified gold by the RIAA in February 2011 .
By June 2014 , it had sold over 960,000 copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan .