Absinthe -LRB- -LSB- ˈæbsɪnθ -RSB- or -LSB- ˈæbsænθ -RSB- French : -LSB- apsɛ̃t -RSB- -RRB- is historically described as a distilled , highly alcoholic -LRB- 45 -- 74 % ABV / 90 -- 148 U.S. proof -RRB- beverage .
It is an anise-flavoured spirit derived from botanicals , including the flowers and leaves of Artemisia absinthium -LRB- `` grand wormwood '' -RRB- , together with green anise , sweet fennel , and other medicinal and culinary herbs .
Absinthe traditionally has a natural green colour but may also be colourless .
It is commonly referred to in historical literature as `` la fée verte '' -LRB- the green fairy -RRB- .
Although it is sometimes mistakenly referred to as a liqueur , absinthe is not traditionally bottled with added sugar ; it is therefore classified as a spirit .
Absinthe is traditionally bottled at a high level of alcohol by volume , but it is normally diluted with water prior to being consumed .
Absinthe originated in the canton of Neuchâtel in Switzerland in the late 18th century .
It rose to great popularity as an alcoholic drink in late 19th - and early 20th-century France , particularly among Parisian artists and writers .
Owing in part to its association with bohemian culture , the consumption of absinthe was opposed by social conservatives and prohibitionists .
Ernest Hemingway , James Joyce , Charles Baudelaire , Paul Verlaine , Arthur Rimbaud , Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec , Amedeo Modigliani , Pablo Picasso , Vincent van Gogh , Oscar Wilde , Marcel Proust , Aleister Crowley , Erik Satie , Edgar Allan Poe , Lord Byron and Alfred Jarry were all known absinthe drinkers .
Absinthe has often been portrayed as a dangerously addictive psychoactive drug and hallucinogen .
The chemical compound thujone , although present in the spirit in only trace amounts , was blamed for its alleged harmful effects .
By 1915 , absinthe had been banned in the United States and in much of Europe , including France , the Netherlands , Belgium , Switzerland and Austria-Hungary .
Although absinthe was vilified , it has not been demonstrated to be any more dangerous than ordinary spirits .
Recent studies have shown that absinthe 's psychoactive properties -LRB- apart from that of the alcohol -RRB- have been exaggerated .
A revival of absinthe began in the 1990s , following the adoption of modern European Union food and beverage laws that removed longstanding barriers to its production and sale .
By the early 21st century , nearly 200 brands of absinthe were being produced in a dozen countries , most notably in France , Switzerland , Australia , Spain , and the Czech Republic .