Adobe Photoshop is a raster graphics editor developed and published by Adobe Systems for macOS and Windows .
Photoshop was created in 1988 by Thomas and John Knoll .
Since then , it has become the de facto industry standard in raster graphics editing , such that the word `` photoshop '' has become a verb as in `` to Photoshop an image , '' `` photoshopping '' and `` photoshop contest '' , though Adobe discourages such use .
It can edit and compose raster images in multiple layers and supports masks , alpha compositing and several color models including RGB , CMYK , CIELAB , spot color and duotone .
Photoshop has vast support for graphic file formats but also uses its own PSD and PSB file formats which support all the aforementioned features .
In addition to raster graphics , it has limited abilities to edit or render text , vector graphics -LRB- especially through clipping path -RRB- , 3D graphics and video .
Photoshop 's feature set can be expanded by Photoshop plug-ins , programs developed and distributed independently of Photoshop that can run inside it and offer new or enhanced features .
Photoshop 's naming scheme was initially based on version numbers .
However , in October 2002 , following the introduction of Creative Suite branding , each new version of Photoshop was designated with `` CS '' plus a number ; e.g. , the eighth major version of Photoshop was Photoshop CS and the ninth major version was Photoshop CS2 .
Photoshop CS3 through CS6 were also distributed in two different editions : Standard and Extended .
In June 2013 , with the introduction of Creative Cloud branding , Photoshop 's licensing scheme was changed to that of software as a service rental model and the `` CS '' suffixes were replaced with `` CC '' .
Historically , Photoshop was bundled with additional software such as Adobe ImageReady , Adobe Fireworks , Adobe Bridge , Adobe Device Central and Adobe Camera RAW .
Alongside Photoshop , Adobe also develops and publishes Photoshop Elements , Photoshop Lightroom , Photoshop Express and Photoshop Touch .
Collectively , they are branded as `` The Adobe Photoshop Family '' .
It is currently a licensed software .