Adolf Hitler -LRB- -LSB- ˈadɔlf ˈhɪtlɐ -RSB- ; 20 April 1889 -- 30 April 1945 -RRB- was a German politician who was the leader of the Nazi Party -LRB- Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei ; NSDAP -RRB- , Chancellor of Germany from 1933 to 1945 , and Führer -LRB- `` Leader '' -RRB- of Nazi Germany from 1934 to 1945 .
As dictator of the German Reich , he initiated World War II in Europe with the invasion of Poland in September 1939 , and was central to the Holocaust .
Hitler was born in Austria , then part of Austria-Hungary , and raised near Linz .
He moved to Germany in 1913 and was decorated during his service in the German Army in World War I .
He joined the German Workers ' Party -LRB- DAP -RRB- , the precursor of the NSDAP , in 1919 and became leader of the NSDAP in 1921 .
In 1923 he attempted a coup in Munich to seize power .
The failed coup resulted in Hitler 's imprisonment , during which he dictated the first volume of his autobiography and political manifesto Mein Kampf -LRB- `` My Struggle '' -RRB- .
After his release in 1924 , Hitler gained popular support by attacking the Treaty of Versailles and promoting Pan-Germanism , anti-semitism , and anti-communism with charismatic oratory and Nazi propaganda .
Hitler frequently denounced international capitalism and communism as being part of a Jewish conspiracy .
By 1933 , the Nazi Party was the largest elected party in the German Reichstag , which led to Hitler 's appointment as Chancellor on 30 January 1933 .
Following fresh elections won by his coalition , the Reichstag passed the Enabling Act , which began the process of transforming the Weimar Republic into Nazi Germany , a one-party dictatorship based on the totalitarian and autocratic ideology of National Socialism .
Hitler aimed to eliminate Jews from Germany and establish a New Order to counter what he saw as the injustice of the post-World War I international order dominated by Britain and France .
His first six years in power resulted in rapid economic recovery from the Great Depression , the effective abandonment of restrictions imposed on Germany after World War I , and the annexation of territories that were home to millions of ethnic Germans -- actions which gave him significant popular support .
Hitler sought Lebensraum -LRB- `` living space '' -RRB- for the German people in Eastern Europe .
His aggressive foreign policy is considered to be the primary cause of the outbreak of World War II in Europe .
He directed large-scale rearmament and on 1 September 1939 invaded Poland , resulting in British and French declarations of war on Germany .
In June 1941 , Hitler ordered an invasion of the Soviet Union .
By the end of 1941 German forces and the European Axis powers occupied most of Europe and North Africa .
Failure to defeat the Soviets and the entry of the United States into the war forced Germany onto the defensive and it suffered a series of escalating defeats .
In the final days of the war , during the Battle of Berlin in 1945 , Hitler married his long-time lover , Eva Braun .
On 30 April 1945 , less than two days later , the two killed themselves to avoid capture by the Red Army , and their corpses were burned .
Under Hitler 's leadership and racially motivated ideology , the Nazi regime was responsible for the genocide of at least 5.5 million Jews and millions of other victims whom he and his followers deemed Untermenschen -LRB- `` sub-humans '' -RRB- and socially undesirable .
Hitler and the Nazi regime were also responsible for the killing of an estimated 19.3 million civilians and prisoners of war .
In addition , 29 million soldiers and civilians died as a result of military action in the European Theatre of World War II .
The number of civilians killed during the Second World War was unprecedented in warfare , and constitutes the deadliest conflict in human history .