Adventure Time is an American animated television series created by Pendleton Ward for Cartoon Network .
It follows the adventures of a boy named Finn -LRB- voiced by Jeremy Shada -RRB- and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake -LRB- John DiMaggio -RRB- a dog with the magical power to change shape and size at will .
Finn and Jake live in the post-apocalyptic Land of Ooo , where they interact with Princess Bubblegum -LRB- Hynden Walch -RRB- , the Ice King -LRB- Tom Kenny -RRB- , Marceline the Vampire Queen -LRB- Olivia Olson -RRB- , BMO -LRB- Niki Yang -RRB- , and others .
The series is based on a 2007 short produced for Nicktoons and Frederator Studios ' animation incubator series Random !
Cartoons .
After the short became a viral hit on the Internet , Cartoon Network commissioned a full-length series , which previewed on March 11 , 2010 , and officially premiered on April 5 , 2010 .
The series draws inspiration from a variety of sources , including the fantasy role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons and video games .
It is produced using hand-drawn animation ; action and dialogue for episodes are decided by storyboarding artists .
Because each episode takes roughly eight to nine months to complete , multiple episodes are worked on concurrently .
The cast members record their lines in group recordings , and the series regularly employs guest actors for minor and recurring characters .
Each episode runs for about eleven minutes ; pairs of episodes are often telecast to fill half-hour program slots .
Eight seasons of the program have aired , and a ninth and final season premiered on April 21 , 2017 .
, a feature-length film is in development .
Since its debut , Adventure Time has been a ratings success for Cartoon Network , with the highest-rated episodes having attracted over 3 million viewers .
The show has received positive reviews from critics anddespite being aimed primarily at childrenhas developed a following among teenagers and adults .
Adventure Time has won awards including : six Primetime Emmy Awards , a Peabody Award , three Annie Awards , two British Academy Children 's Awards , a Motion Picture Sound Editors Award , a Pixel Award , and a Kerrang !
Award .
The series has also been nominated for three Critics ' Choice Television Awards , two Annecy Festival Awards , a TCA Award , and a Sundance Film Festival Award , among others .
Of the many comic book spin-offs based on the series , one received an Eisner Award and two Harvey Awards .
The series has also inspired various clothing items and related merchandise , video games , and DVD compilations .