Advertising is an audio or visual form of marketing communication that employs an openly sponsored , nonpersonal message to promote or sell a product , service or idea .
Sponsors of advertising are often businesses who wish to promote their products or services .
Advertising is differentiated from public relations in that an advertiser usually pays for and has control over the message .
It is differentiated from personal selling in that the message is nonpersonal , i.e. , not directed to a particular individual .
Advertising is communicated through various mass media , including old media such as newspapers , magazines , Television , Radio , outdoor advertising or direct mail ; or new media such as search results , blogs , websites or text messages .
The actual presentation of the message in a medium is referred to as an advertisement or `` ad '' .
Commercial ads often seek to generate increased consumption of their products or services through `` branding , '' which associates a product name or image with certain qualities in the minds of consumers .
On the other hand , ads that intend to elicit an immediate sale are known as direct response advertising .
Non-commercial advertisers who spend money to advertise items other than a consumer product or service include political parties , interest groups , religious organizations and governmental agencies .
Non-profit organizations may use free modes of persuasion , such as a public service announcement .
Advertising may also be used to reassure employees or shareholders that a company is viable or successful .
Modern advertising was created with the techniques introduced with tobacco advertising in the 1920s , most significantly with the campaigns of Edward Bernays , considered the founder of modern , `` Madison Avenue '' advertising .
In 2015 , the world spent an estimate of on advertising .
Its projected distribution for 2017 is 40.4 % on TV , 33.3 % on digital , 9 % on newspapers , 6.9 % on magazines , 5.8 % on outdoor and 4.3 % on radio .
Internationally , the largest -LRB- `` big four '' -RRB- advertising conglomerates are Interpublic , Omnicom , Publicis , and WPP .
In Latin , ad vertere means `` to turn toward '' .