The Africa Cup of Nations , officially CAN -LRB- Coupe d'Afrique des Nations -RRB- , also referred to as African Cup of Nations , or AFCON , is the main international association football competition in Africa .
It is sanctioned by the Confederation of African Football -LRB- CAF -RRB- , and was first held in 1957 .
Since 1968 , it has been held every two years .
The title holders at the time of a FIFA Confederations Cup qualify for that competition .
In 1957 there were only three participating nations : Egypt , Sudan and Ethiopia .
South Africa was originally scheduled to compete , but were disqualified due to the apartheid policies of the government then in power .
Since then , the tournament has grown greatly , making it necessary to hold a qualifying tournament .
The number of participants in the final tournament reached 16 in 1998 -LRB- 16 teams were to compete in 1996 but Nigeria withdrew , reducing the field to 15 , and the same happened with Togo 's withdrawal in 2010 -RRB- , and since then , the format has been unchanged , with the sixteen teams being drawn into four groups of four teams each , with the top two teams of each group advancing to a `` knock-out '' stage .
Egypt is the most successful nation in the cup 's history , winning the tournament a record of seven times -LRB- including when Egypt was known as the United Arab Republic between 1958 and 1961 -RRB- .
Three different trophies have been awarded during the tournament 's history , with Ghana and Cameroon winning the first two versions to keep after each of them won a tournament three times .
The current trophy was first awarded in 2002 and with Egypt winning it indefinitely after winning their unprecedented third consecutive title in 2010 .
As of 2013 , the tournament was switched to being held in odd-numbered years so as not to clash with the FIFA World Cup .
In July 2016 , Total has secured an eight-year sponsorship package from the Confederation of African Football -LRB- CAF -RRB- to support 10 of its principal competitions .
Total will start with the Africa Cup of Nations to be held in Gabon therefore renaming it Total Africa cup of Nations .