Abu ` l-Fath Jalal-ud-din Muhammad -LRB- 15 October 1542 -- 27 October 1605 -RRB- , popularly known as Akbar I -LRB- -LSB- əkbər -RSB- , literally `` the great '' -RRB- and later Akbar the Great , was the third Mughal emperor , who reigned from 1556 to 1605 .
Akbar succeeded his father , Humayun , under a regent , Bairam Khan , who helped the young emperor expand and consolidate Mughal domains in India .
A strong personality and a successful general , Akbar gradually enlarged the Mughal Empire to include nearly all of the Indian Subcontinent north of the Godavari river .
His power and influence , however , extended over the entire country because of Mughal military , political , cultural , and economic dominance .
To unify the vast Mughal state , Akbar established a centralised system of administration throughout his empire and adopted a policy of conciliating conquered rulers through marriage and diplomacy .
To preserve peace and order in a religiously and culturally diverse empire , he adopted policies that won him the support of his non-Muslim subjects .
Eschewing tribal bonds and Islamic state identity , Akbar strived to unite far-flung lands of his realm through loyalty , expressed through a Indo-Persian culture , to himself as an emperor who had near-divine status .
Mughal India developed a strong and stable economy , leading to commercial expansion and greater patronage of culture .
Akbar himself was a patron of art and culture .
He was fond of literature , and created a library of over 24,000 volumes written in Sanskrit , Hindustani , Persian , Greek , Latin , Arabic and Kashmiri , staffed by many scholars , translators , artists , calligraphers , scribes , bookbinders and readers .
Holy men of many faiths , poets , architects and artisans adorned his court from all over the world for study and discussion .
Akbar 's courts at Delhi , Agra , and Fatehpur Sikri became centres of the arts , letters , and learning .
Perso-Islamic culture began to merge and blend with indigenous Indian elements , and a distinct Indo-Persian culture emerged characterised by Mughal style arts , painting , and architecture .
Disillusioned with orthodox Islam and perhaps hoping to bring about religious unity within his empire , Akbar promulgated Din-i-Ilahi , a syncretic creed derived from Islam , Hinduism , Zoroastrianism , and Christianity .
A simple , monotheistic cult , tolerant in outlook , it centred on Akbar as a prophet , for which he drew the ire of the ulema and orthodox Muslims .
Many of his courtiers followed Din-i-Ilahi as their religion as well , as many believed that Akbar was a prophet .
One famous courtier who followed this blended religion was Birbal .
Akbar 's reign significantly influenced the course of Indian history .
During his rule , the Mughal empire tripled in size and wealth .
He created a powerful military system and instituted effective political and social reforms .
By abolishing the sectarian tax on non-Muslims and appointing them to high civil and military posts , he was the first Mughal ruler to win the trust and loyalty of the native subjects .
He had Sanskrit literature translated , participated in native festivals , realising that a stable empire depended on the co-operation and good-will of his subjects .
Thus , the foundations for a multicultural empire under Mughal rule was laid during his reign .
Akbar was succeeded as emperor by his son , Jahangir .