Albania -LRB- -LSB- ælˈbeɪniə , _ ɔːl - -RSB- , ; Shqipëri / Shqipëria Shqipni/Shqipnia or Shqypni/Shqypnia -RRB- , officially the Republic of Albania -LRB- Republika e Shqipërisë , -LSB- ɾɛpuˈblika ɛ ʃcipəˈɾiːsə -RSB- -RRB- , is a country in Southeastern Europe .
Albania spans 28,748 km2 and had a total population of almost 3 million people .
It is a unitary parliamentary constitutional republic with the capital in Tirana , the country 's largest city and main economic and commercial centre , followed by Durrës and Vlorë .
It is located in the south-western part of the Balkan peninsula , bordered by Montenegro to the northwest , Kosovo to the northeast , the Republic of Macedonia to the east , and Greece to the south and southeast .
The country has a coastline on the northern shore of the Mediterranean Sea , the Adriatic Sea to the west and the Ionian Sea to the southwest where the Albanian Riviera begins .
Albania is less than 72 km from Italy , across the Strait of Otranto which connects the Adriatic Sea to the Ionian Sea .
During the classical times , the modern area of Albania was home to several Illyrian , Thracian and Greek tribes , as well as several Greek colonies established on the Illyrian coast .
In the 3rd century BC , the area was annexed by Rome and became part of the Roman provinces of Dalmatia , Macedonia and Moesia Superior .
In 1190 , the first Albanian entity , the Principality of Arbanon was established by archon Progon in the region of Krujë , within the Byzantine Empire .
The territory of Albania was conquered by the Ottoman Empire in the 15th century , of which it remained part of for the next five centuries .
After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire in Europe , following the Balkan Wars , Albania declared its independence in 1912 and was recognized the following year .
The Kingdom of Albania was invaded by Italy in 1939 , which formed Greater Albania , before becoming a Nazi German protectorate in 1943 .
The following year , a socialist People 's Republic was established under the leadership of Enver Hoxha and the Party of Labour .
Albania experienced widespread social and political transformations in the communist era , as well as isolation from much of the international community .
In 1991 , the Socialist Republic was dissolved and the Republic of Albania was established .
Albania is a democratic and developing country with an upper-middle income economy .
The service sector dominates the country 's economy , followed by the industrial and agriculture sector .
After the fall of communism in Albania , free-market reforms have opened the country to foreign investment , especially in the development of energy and transportation infrastructure .
Albania has a high HDI and provides universal health care system and free primary and secondary education to its citizens .
Albania is a member of the United Nations , NATO , WTO , World Bank , the Council of Europe , the OSCE , the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation .
It is also an official candidate for membership in the European Union .
Albania is one of the founding members of the Energy Community , Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation and the Union for the Mediterranean .
It is home to the largest lake in Southern Europe and one of the oldest lakes in Europe .