Aleister Crowley -LRB- -LSB- ˈkroʊli -RSB- born Edward Alexander Crowley ; 12 October 1875 -- 1 December 1947 -RRB- was an English occultist , ceremonial magician , poet , painter , novelist , and mountaineer .
He founded the religion of Thelema , identifying himself as the prophet entrusted with guiding humanity into the Æon of Horus in the early 20th century .
A prolific writer , he published widely over the course of his life .
Born to a wealthy Plymouth Brethren family in Royal Leamington Spa , Warwickshire , Crowley rejected this fundamentalist Christian faith to pursue an interest in Western esotericism .
He was educated at the University of Cambridge , where he focused his attentions on mountaineering and poetry , resulting in several publications .
Some biographers allege that here he was recruited into a British intelligence agency , further suggesting that he remained a spy throughout his life .
In 1898 he joined the esoteric Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , where he was trained in ceremonial magic by Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers and Allan Bennett .
Moving to Boleskine House by Loch Ness in Scotland , he went mountaineering in Mexico with Oscar Eckenstein , before studying Hindu and Buddhist practices in India .
He married Rose Edith Kelly and in 1904 they honeymooned in Cairo , Egypt , where Crowley claimed to have been contacted by a supernatural entity named Aiwass , who provided him with The Book of the Law , a sacred text that served as the basis for Thelema .
Announcing the start of the Æon of Horus , The Book declared that its followers should `` Do what thou wilt '' and seek to align themselves with their True Will through the practice of magick .
After an unsuccessful attempt to climb Kanchenjunga and a visit to India and China , Crowley returned to Britain , where he attracted attention as a prolific author of poetry , novels , and occult literature .
In 1907 , he and George Cecil Jones co-founded a Thelemite order , the A ∴ A ∴ , through which they propagated the religion .
After spending time in Algeria , in 1912 he was initiated into another esoteric order , the German-based Ordo Templi Orientis -LRB- O.T.O. -RRB- , rising to become the leader of its British branch , which he reformulated in accordance with his Thelemite beliefs .
Through the O.T.O. , Thelemite groups were established in Britain , Australia , and North America .
Crowley spent the First World War in the United States , where he took up painting and campaigned for the German war effort against Britain , later revealing that he had infiltrated the pro-German movement to assist the British intelligence services .
In 1920 he established the Abbey of Thelema , a religious commune in Cefalù , Sicily where he lived with various followers .
His libertine lifestyle led to denunciations in the British press , and the Italian government evicted him in 1923 .
He divided the following two decades between France , Germany , and England , and continued to promote Thelema until his death .
Crowley gained widespread notoriety during his lifetime , being a recreational drug experimenter , bisexual and an individualist social critic .
He was denounced in the popular press as `` the wickedest man in the world '' and a Satanist .
Crowley has remained a highly influential figure over Western esotericism and the counter-culture , and continues to be considered a prophet in Thelema .
In 2002 , a BBC poll ranked him as the seventy-third greatest Briton of all time .