Alexander Hamilton -LRB- January 11 , 1755 or 1757July 12 , 1804 -RRB- was an American statesman and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States .
He was an influential interpreter and promoter of the U.S. Constitution , as well as the founder of the nation 's financial system , the Federalist Party , the United States Coast Guard , and The New York Post newspaper .
As the first Secretary of the Treasury , Hamilton was the main author of the economic policies of the George Washington administration .
He took the lead in the funding of the states ' debts by the Federal government , as well as the establishment of a national bank , a system of tariffs , and friendly trade relations with Britain .
His vision included a strong central government led by a vigorous executive branch , a strong commercial economy , with a national bank and support for manufacturing , plus a strong military .
This was challenged by Virginia agrarians Thomas Jefferson and James Madison who formed a rival party .
They favored strong states based in rural America and protected by state militias as opposed to a strong national army and navy .
They denounced Hamilton as too friendly toward Britain and toward monarchy in general , and too oriented toward cities , business and banking .
Hamilton was born out of wedlock in Charlestown , Nevis to a married mother of English and French Huguenot ancestry and a Scottish father .
His father , James A. Hamilton , was the fourth son of Alexander Hamilton , the laird of Grange , Ayrshire .
Orphaned as a child by his mother 's death and his father 's abandonment , Hamilton was taken in by an older cousin and later by a prosperous merchant family .
He was recognized for his intelligence and talent , and sponsored by a group of wealthy local men to travel to New York City to pursue his education .
Hamilton attended King 's College -LRB- now Columbia University -RRB- , choosing to stay in the Thirteen Colonies to seek his fortune .
Discontinuing his studies before graduating when the college closed its doors during British occupation of the city , Hamilton played a major role in the American Revolutionary War .
At the start of the war in 1775 , he joined a militia company .
In early 1776 , he raised a provincial artillery company , to which he was appointed captain .
He soon became the senior aide to General Washington , the American forces ' commander-in-chief .
Hamilton was dispatched by Washington on numerous missions to convey plans to his generals .
After the war , Hamilton was elected as a representative to the Congress of the Confederation from New York .
He resigned to practice law , and founded the Bank of New York .
Hamilton was among those dissatisfied with the weak national government .
He led the Annapolis Convention , which successfully influenced Congress to issue a call for the Philadelphia Convention in order to create a new constitution .
He was an active participant at Philadelphia , and he helped achieve ratification by writing 51 of the 85 installments of The Federalist Papers which , to this day , are the single most important reference for Constitutional interpretation .
Hamilton became the leading cabinet member in the new government under President Washington .
He was a nationalist who emphasized strong central government and successfully argued that the implied powers of the Constitution provided the legal authority to fund the national debt , assume states ' debts , and create the government-backed Bank of the United States .
These programs were funded primarily by a tariff on imports , and later also by a highly controversial tax on whiskey .
To overcome localism , Hamilton mobilized a nationwide network of friends of the government , especially bankers and businessmen , which became the Federalist Party .
A major issue in the emergence of the American two-party system was the Jay Treaty , largely designed by Hamilton in 1794 .
It established friendly trade relations with Britain , to the chagrin of France and the supporters of the French Revolution .
Hamilton played a central role in the Federalist party , which dominated national and state politics until it lost the election of 1800 to Jefferson 's Democratic-Republican Party .
In 1795 , he returned to the practice of law in New York .
He tried to control the policies of President Adams -LRB- 1797 -- 1801 -RRB- .
In 1798 -- 99 , Hamilton called for mobilization against France after the XYZ Affair and became commander of a new army , which he readied for war .
However , the Quasi-War was never officially declared and did not involve army action , though it was hard-fought at sea .
In the end , President Adams found a diplomatic solution that avoided a war with France .
Hamilton 's opposition to Adams ' re-election helped cause his defeat in the 1800 election .
Jefferson and Aaron Burr tied for the presidency in the electoral college in 1801 , and Hamilton helped to defeat Burr , whom he found unprincipled , and to elect Jefferson despite philosophical differences .
Hamilton continued his legal and business activities in New York City , and was active in ending the legality of the international slave trade .
Vice President Burr ran for governor of New York State in 1804 , and Hamilton crusaded against him as unworthy .
Burr took offense and challenged him to a duel .
Burr mortally wounded Hamilton , who died the next day .