Alice Cooper -LRB- born Vincent Damon Furnier ; February 4 , 1948 -RRB- is an American singer , songwriter , and actor whose career spans over five decades .
With his distinctive raspy voice and a stage show that features guillotines , electric chairs , fake blood , deadly snakes , baby dolls , and dueling swords , Cooper is considered by music journalists and peers alike to be `` The Godfather of Shock Rock '' .
He has drawn equally from horror films , vaudeville , and garage rock to pioneer a macabre and theatrical brand of rock designed to shock people .
Originating in Phoenix , Arizona , in the late 1960s after he moved from Detroit , Michigan , `` Alice Cooper '' was originally a band consisting of Furnier on vocals and harmonica , lead guitarist Glen Buxton , Michael Bruce on rhythm guitar , Dennis Dunaway on bass guitar , and drummer Neal Smith .
The original Alice Cooper band released its first album in 1969 but broke into the international music mainstream with the 1971 hit `` I 'm Eighteen '' from their third studio album Love It to Death , which was followed by the even bigger single `` School 's Out '' in 1972 .
The band reached their commercial peak with the 1973 album Billion Dollar Babies .
Furnier adopted the band 's name as his own name in the 1970s and began a solo career with the 1975 concept album Welcome to My Nightmare .
In 2011 , he released Welcome 2 My Nightmare , his 19th album as a solo artist and 26th album in total .
In 2011 , the original Alice Cooper band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame .
Expanding from his Detroit rock roots , Cooper has experimented with a number of musical styles , including art rock , hard rock , heavy metal , new wave , glam metal , pop rock , experimental rock , and industrial rock .
Cooper is known for his social and witty persona offstage , with The Rolling Stone Album Guide calling him the world 's most `` beloved heavy metal entertainer '' .
He is credited with helping to shape the sound and look of heavy metal , and has been described as the artist who `` first introduced horror imagery to rock 'n' roll , and whose stagecraft and showmanship have permanently transformed the genre '' .
Away from music , Cooper is a film actor , a golfing celebrity , a restaurateur , and , since 2004 , a popular radio DJ with his classic rock show Nights with Alice Cooper .