`` All the Lovers '' is a song recorded by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue for her eleventh studio album , Aphrodite -LRB- 2010 -RRB- .
One of the last songs to be recorded for the album , `` All the Lovers '' was written by Jim Eliot and Mima Stilwell and produced by the former .
Stuart Price , the executive producer of Aphrodite , was responsible for additional production and mixing of the song .
Minogue felt `` All the Lovers '' summarised the `` euphoria '' of the album perfectly and chose it to be the lead single from Aphrodite .
It was then globally released by Parlophone as a CD single and digital download on 11 June 2010 .
`` All the Lovers '' is a midtempo disco song with influences of electropop music .
The lyrics of the song serve as an invitation to the dance floor and an assertion that Minogue 's past relationships do not `` compare '' to the one she shares with her present lover .
Upon its release , `` All the Lovers '' garnered critical acclaim and was commended for its chorus and production .
Many critics found it similar to Minogue 's 2004 single `` I Believe in You '' .
Compared to the lead singles from Minogue 's previous albums , `` All the Lovers '' underperformed in Australia and missed peaking inside the top ten of the Australian Singles Chart .
However , it was a commercial success in Europe , reaching the top ten in numerous countries including Austria , Belgium , France , Italy , Spain and Switzerland and the United Kingdom .
In the latter country , `` All the Lovers '' peaked at number three on the UK Singles Chart .
A club hit in the United States , it topped the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart .
`` All the Lovers '' was certified gold in Australia , Italy , and the United Kingdom .
An accompanying music video for `` All the Lovers '' was filmed in Downtown Los Angeles by Joseph Kahn , and features Minogue singing the song from atop a pyramid of underwear-clad couples .
Critical reception towards the video was favourable , with many critics enjoying its concept and imagery .
The music video was banned in several Asian countries due to its sexual nature .
For additional promotion , Minogue performed the song on various television shows , such as Germany 's Next Topmodel and Alan Carr : Chatty Man .
It was included on the set list of her Aphrodite : Les Folies , Kiss Me Once , and 2015 Summer tours , as well as on the Kylie Christmas concert series .
An orchestral version of the song was featured on the track list of Minogue 's 2012 compilation album The Abbey Road Sessions .