The American Civil War was fought in the United States from 1861 to 1865 .
After a long standing controversy over slavery and state 's rights , war broke out in April 1861 , when Confederates attacked Fort Sumter in South Carolina , shortly after Abraham Lincoln was elected .
The nationalists of the Union proclaimed loyalty to the U.S. Constitution .
They faced secessionists of the Confederate States of America advocating states ' rights to perpetual slavery and its expansion in the Americas .
Among the 34 U.S. states in February 1861 , seven Southern slave states individually declared their secession from the U.S. to form the Confederate States of America .
The Confederacy grew to include eleven states ; it claimed two more border states -LRB- Kentucky and Missouri -RRB- , the Indian Territory , and the southern portions of the Union 's western territories of Arizona and New Mexico , which was organized and incorporated into the Confederacy as Confederate Arizona .
The Confederacy was never diplomatically recognized by the United States government , nor was it recognized by any foreign country -LRB- although Britain and France granted it belligerent status -RRB- .
The states that remained loyal , including the border states where slavery was legal , were known as the Union or the North .
The North and South quickly raised volunteer and conscription armies that fought mostly in the South over four years .
During this time many innovations in warfare occurred , including the development and use of iron-clad ships , ultimately changing naval strategy around the world .
The Union finally won the war when General Robert E. Lee surrendered to General Ulysses S. Grant at the battle of Appomattox , which triggered a series of surrenders by Confederate generals throughout the southern states .
Four years of intense combat left 620,000 to 750,000 soldiers dead , a higher number than the number of American military deaths in World War I and World War II combined , and much of the South 's infrastructure was destroyed .
The Confederacy collapsed , slavery was abolished and 4 million slaves were freed .
The Reconstruction Era -LRB- 1863 -- 1877 -RRB- overlapped and followed the war , with the process of restoring national unity , strengthening the national government , and granting civil rights to freed slaves throughout the country .
The Civil War is arguably the most studied and written about episode in American history .