Amy Meredith Poehler -LRB- -LSB- ˈpoʊlər -RSB- born September 16 , 1971 -RRB- is an American actress , comedian , director , producer , and writer .
After studying improv at Chicago 's Second City and ImprovOlympic in the early 1990s , she went to New York City in 1996 to become part of the improvisational comedy troupe Upright Citizens Brigade .
The group 's act became a half-hour sketch comedy series on Comedy Central in 1998 .
Along with other members of the comedy group , Poehler was a founder of the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre .
She is best known by starring as Leslie Knope in the NBC sitcom Parks and Recreation , for which she won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Television Musical or Comedy Series in 2014 and a Critics ' Choice Award for Best Actress in a Comedy Series in 2012 .
Poehler was a cast member on the NBC television series Saturday Night Live from 2001 to 2008 and became co-anchor of SNL 's Weekend Update in 2004 alongside friend and colleague Tina Fey .
She is also known for voicing Joy from Inside Out , Sally O'Malley from the Horton Hears a Who !
movie adaption , Bessie Higgenbottom in the 2008 -- 2011 Nickelodeon series , The Mighty B !
and Homily Clock from the American-English dub of The Secret World of Arrietty .
Poehler served as an executive producer on the Swedish-American sitcom Welcome to Sweden , along with her brother Greg Poehler .
The series aired on NBC .
She is also an executive producer on Broad City which airs on Comedy Central , and appeared in the season one finale .
Since August 2015 , she has served as an executive producer on the Hulu original series Difficult People , which stars her former Parks and Recreation co-star Billy Eichner and comedian Julie Klausner , the latter of whom is the creator of the show .
In December 2015 , Poehler received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her contributions in television .
An 18-time Primetime Emmy Award nominee , she won the 2016 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for Saturday Night Live .