Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis -LRB- ALS -RRB- , also known as Lou Gehrig 's disease and motor neurone disease -LRB- MND -RRB- , is a specific disease that causes the death of neurons which control voluntary muscles .
Some also use the term motor neuron disease for a group of conditions of which ALS is the most common .
ALS is characterized by stiff muscles , muscle twitching , and gradually worsening weakness due to muscles decreasing in size .
This results in difficulty speaking , swallowing , and eventually breathing .
The cause is not known in 90 % to 95 % of cases .
About 5 -- 10 % of cases are inherited from a person 's parents .
About half of these genetic cases are due to one of two specific genes .
The diagnosis is based on a person 's signs and symptoms with testing done to rule out other potential causes .
No cure for ALS is known .
A medication called riluzole may extend life by about two to three months .
Non-invasive ventilation may result in both improved quality and length of life .
The disease usually starts around the age of 60 and in inherited cases around the age of 50 .
The average survival from onset to death is two to four years .
About 10 % survive longer than 10 years .
Most die from respiratory failure .
In much of the world , rates of ALS are unknown .
In Europe and the United States the disease affects about two people per 100,000 per year .
Descriptions of the disease date back to at least 1824 by Charles Bell .
In 1869 , the connection between the symptoms and the underlying neurological problems was first described by Jean-Martin Charcot , who in 1874 began using the term amyotrophic lateral sclerosis .
It became well known in the United States in the 20th century when in 1939 it affected the baseball player Lou Gehrig and later worldwide when physicist Stephen Hawking , diagnosed in 1963 and expected to die within two years , became famous .
In 2014 , videos of the ice bucket challenge went viral on the World Wide Web and increased public awareness of the condition .