Andhra Pradesh -LRB- -LSB- , ahndr@_pr@'dEsh -RSB- -RRB- is one of the 29 states of India , situated on the southeastern coast of the country .
The state is the eighth largest state in India covering an area of 162307 km2 .
As per 2011 Census of India , the state is tenth largest by population with 49,386,799 inhabitants .
On 2 June 2014 , the north-western portion of the state was bifurcated to form a new state of Telangana .
Andhra Pradesh 's longtime capital , Hyderabad , was transferred to Telangana as part of the division .
However , in accordance with the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act , 2014 , Hyderabad will remain the de jure capital of both Andhra Pradesh and Telangana states for a period of time not exceeding 10 years .
The new riverfront proposed capital in Guntur district is Amaravati , which is under the jurisdiction of APCRDA .
The Gross State Domestic Product -LRB- GSDP -RRB- of the state in the 2016 -- 2017 financial year at current prices stood at .
The state has a coastline of 974 km with jurisdiction over nearly 15,000 km2 territorial waters , the second longest among all the states of India after Gujarat .
It is bordered by Telangana in the north-west , Chhattisgarh in the north , Odisha in the north-east , Karnataka in the west , Tamil Nadu in the south and the water body of Bay of Bengal in the east .
A small enclave of 30 km2 of Yanam , a district of Puducherry , lies south of Kakinada in the Godavari delta to the east of the state .
Andhra Pradesh is composed of two regions : Coastal Andhra , located along the Bay of Bengal , and Rayalaseema , in the inland southwestern part of the state .
These two regions comprise 13 districts , with 9 in Coastal Andhra and 4 in Rayalaseema .
Visakhapatnam , located on the Bay of Bengal in North Coastal Andhra is the largest city and commercial hub of the state with a GDP of $ 26 billion , followed in population and GDP by Vijayawada , which is located on the Krishna River and which has a GDP of $ 3 billion as of 2010 .
Andhra Pradesh hosted 121.8 million visitors in 2015 , a 30 % growth in tourist arrivals over the previous year .
The Tirumala Venkateswara Temple in Tirupati is one of the world 's most visited religious sites , with 18.25 million visitors per year .
Other pilgrimage centers in Andhra Pradesh include the Ameen Peer Dargah in Kadapa , the Mahachaitya at Amaravathi , and the Kanaka Durga Temple in Vijayawada , while the state 's natural attractions include the beaches of Visakhapatnam , hill stations such as the Araku Valley and Horsley Hills , and the island of Konaseema in the Godavari River delta .