Andrew Jackson -LRB- March 15 , 1767 -- June 8 , 1845 -RRB- was an American soldier and statesman who served as the seventh President of the United States from 1829 to 1837 and was the founder of the Democratic Party .
Before being elected to the presidency , Jackson served in Congress and gained fame as a general in the United States Army .
As president , Jackson sought to advance the rights of the `` common man '' against a `` corrupt aristocracy '' and to preserve the Union .
He became a practicing lawyer in Tennessee and in 1791 he married Rachel Donelson Robards .
Jackson served briefly in the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate .
Upon returning to Tennessee , he was appointed a justice on the Tennessee Supreme Court , serving from 1798 until 1804 .
In 1801 , Jackson was appointed colonel in the Tennessee militia , and was elected its commander the following year .
He led Tennessee militia and U.S. Army regulars during the Creek War of 1813 -- 1814 , winning a major victory at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend .
The subsequent Treaty of Fort Jackson required the Creek surrender of vast lands in present-day Alabama and Georgia .
Jackson won a decisive victory in the War of 1812 over the British army at the Battle of New Orleans , making him a national hero .
Following the conclusion of the War of 1812 , Jackson led U.S. forces in the First Seminole War , which helped produce the Adams -- Onís Treaty of 1819 and the transfer of Florida from Spain to the United States .
Following the ratification of the treaty , Jackson briefly served as Florida 's first territorial governor before winning election as a U.S. Senator from Tennessee .
Jackson was a candidate for president in 1824 but , lacking a majority of electoral votes , lost the election in the House of Representatives to John Quincy Adams .
In reaction to a `` corrupt bargain '' between opponents Adams and Henry Clay , Jackson 's supporters founded the Democratic Party .
He ran again for president in 1828 against Adams and won in a landslide .
As president , Jackson faced a threat of secession by South Carolina over the `` Tariff of Abominations '' enacted under Adams .
The Nullification Crisis was defused when the tariff was amended and Jackson threatened the use of military force if South Carolina attempted to secede .
Congress , led by Clay , attempted to reauthorize the Second Bank of the United States ; Jackson regarded the Bank as a corrupt institution and vetoed the renewal of its charter .
After a lengthy struggle , Jackson and the congressional Democrats thoroughly dismantled the Bank .
In 1835 , Jackson became the only president to completely pay off the national debt , fulfilling a longtime goal .
In foreign affairs , Jackson 's administration concluded a `` most favored nation '' treaty with Great Britain , settled U.S. claims of damages by France from the Napoleonic Wars , and recognized the Republic of Texas .
His presidency marked the beginning of the ascendancy of the `` spoils system '' in American politics .
In 1830 , Jackson signed the Indian Removal Act , which relocated most members of the Native American tribes in the South to Indian Territory -LRB- now Oklahoma -RRB- .
The relocation process dispossessed the Indians and resulted in widespread death and sickness .
In his retirement , Jackson remained active in Democratic Party politics , supporting the presidencies of Martin Van Buren and James K. Polk .
Jackson was widely revered in the United States , but his reputation has declined since the mid-20th century , largely due to his role in Indian removal and support for slavery .
Surveys of historians and scholars have ranked Jackson between 6th and 18th most successful among United States presidents .