Android is a mobile operating system developed by Google , based on the Linux kernel and designed primarily for touchscreen mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets .
Android 's user interface is mainly based on direct manipulation , using touch gestures that loosely correspond to real-world actions , such as swiping , tapping and pinching , to manipulate on-screen objects , along with a virtual keyboard for text input .
In addition to touchscreen devices , Google has further developed Android TV for televisions , Android Auto for cars , and Android Wear for wrist watches , each with a specialized user interface .
Variants of Android are also used on notebooks , game consoles , digital cameras , and other electronics .
Initially developed by Android Inc. , which Google bought in 2005 , Android was unveiled in 2007 , along with the founding of the Open Handset Alliancea consortium of hardware , software , and telecommunication companies devoted to advancing open standards for mobile devices .
Beginning with the first commercial Android device in September 2008 , the operating system has gone through multiple major releases , with the current version being 7.0 `` Nougat '' , released in August 2016 .
Android applications -LRB- `` apps '' -RRB- can be downloaded from the Google Play store , which features over 2.7 million apps as of February 2017 .
Android has been the best-selling OS on tablets since 2013 , and runs on the vast majority of smartphones .
, Android has two billion monthly active users , and it has the largest installed base of any operating system .
Android 's source code is released by Google under an open source license , although most Android devices ultimately ship with a combination of free and open source and proprietary software , including proprietary software required for accessing Google services .
Android is popular with technology companies that require a ready-made , low-cost and customizable operating system for high-tech devices .
Its open nature has encouraged a large community of developers and enthusiasts to use the open-source code as a foundation for community-driven projects , which deliver updates to older devices , add new features for advanced users or bring Android to devices originally shipped with other operating systems .
The extensive variation of hardware in Android devices causes significant delays for software upgrades , with new versions of the operating system and security patches typically taking months before reaching consumers , or sometimes not at all .
The success of Android has made it a target for patent and copyright litigation as part of the so-called `` smartphone wars '' between technology companies .