Andrew G. Kaufman -LRB- January 17 , 1949 -- May 16 , 1984 -RRB- was an American entertainer , actor , writer , performance artist and professional wrestler .
While often referred to as a comedian , Kaufman described himself instead as a `` song and dance man . ''
He disdained telling jokes and engaging in comedy as it was traditionally understood , once saying in a rare introspective interview , `` I am not a comic , I have never told a joke .
... The comedian 's promise is that he will go out there and make you laugh with him .
... My only promise is that I will try to entertain you as best I can . ''
After working in small comedy clubs in the early 1970s , Kaufman first came to the attention of a wider audience in 1975 , when he was invited to perform portions of his act on the first season of Saturday Night Live .
His Foreign Man character was the basis of his role as Latka Gravas on the hit television show Taxi , on which he appeared from 1978 until 1983 .
During this time , he continued to tour comedy clubs and theaters in a series of unique performance art / comedy shows , sometimes appearing as himself and sometimes as obnoxiously rude lounge singer Tony Clifton .
He was also a frequent guest on sketch comedy and late-night talk shows , particularly Late Night with David Letterman .
In 1982 , Kaufman brought his professional wrestling villain act to Letterman 's show with a staged encounter with Jerry `` The King '' Lawler of the Continental Wrestling Association -LRB- although the fact that the altercation was planned in advance was not publicly disclosed for over a decade -RRB- .
Kaufman died of lung cancer at age 35 in 1984 .
However , because pranks and elaborate ruses were major elements of his career , persistent rumors have circulated insisting that Kaufman faked his own death as a grand hoax .
His body of work maintains a cult following and he continues to be respected for his original material , unique performance style , and unflinching commitment to character .