Angelina Jolie Pitt -LRB- -LSB- dʒoʊˈliː -RSB- ; née Voight ; born June 4 , 1975 -RRB- is an American actress , filmmaker , philanthropist and humanitarian .
She has received an Academy Award , two Screen Actors Guild Awards , and three Golden Globe Awards , and has been cited as Hollywood 's highest-paid actress .
Jolie made her screen debut as a child alongside her father , Jon Voight , in Lookin ' to Get Out -LRB- 1982 -RRB- .
Her film career began in earnest a decade later with the low-budget production Cyborg 2 -LRB- 1993 -RRB- , followed by her first leading role in a major film , Hackers -LRB- 1995 -RRB- .
She starred in the critically acclaimed biographical cable films George Wallace -LRB- 1997 -RRB- and Gia -LRB- 1998 -RRB- , and won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in the drama Girl , Interrupted -LRB- 1999 -RRB- .
Jolie 's starring role as the video game heroine Lara Croft in Lara Croft : Tomb Raider -LRB- 2001 -RRB- established her as a leading Hollywood actress .
She continued her successful action-star career with Mr. & Mrs. Smith -LRB- 2005 -RRB- , Wanted -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , and Salt -LRB- 2010 -RRB- , and received critical acclaim for her performances in the dramas A Mighty Heart -LRB- 2007 -RRB- and Changeling -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , which earned her a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Actress .
Beginning in the 2010s , she expanded her career into directing , screenwriting , and producing , starting with the wartime dramas In the Land of Blood and Honey -LRB- 2011 -RRB- and Unbroken -LRB- 2014 -RRB- .
Her biggest commercial success came with the fantasy picture Maleficent -LRB- 2014 -RRB- .
In addition to her film career , Jolie is noted for her humanitarian efforts , for which she has received a Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award and an honorary damehood of the Order of St Michael and St George -LRB- DCMG -RRB- , among other honors .
She promotes various causes , including conservation , education , and women 's rights , and is most noted for her advocacy on behalf of refugees as a Special Envoy for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees -LRB- UNHCR -RRB- .
As a public figure , Jolie has been cited as one of the most influential and powerful people in the American entertainment industry , as well as the world 's most beautiful woman , by various media outlets .
Her personal life is the subject of wide publicity .
Divorced from actors Jonny Lee Miller and Billy Bob Thornton , she separated from her third husband , actor Brad Pitt , in September 2016 .
They have six children together , three of whom were adopted internationally .