Animal Farm is an allegorical novella by George Orwell , first published in England on 17 August 1945 .
According to Orwell , the book reflects events leading up to the Russian Revolution of 1917 and then on into the Stalinist era of the Soviet Union .
Orwell , a democratic socialist , was a critic of Joseph Stalin and hostile to Moscow-directed Stalinism , an attitude that was critically shaped by his experiences during the Spanish Civil War .
The Soviet Union , he believed , had become a brutal dictatorship , built upon a cult of personality and enforced by a reign of terror .
In a letter to Yvonne Davet , Orwell described Animal Farm as a satirical tale against Stalin -LRB- `` un conte satirique contre Staline '' -RRB- , and in his essay `` Why I Write '' -LRB- 1946 -RRB- , wrote that Animal Farm was the first book in which he tried , with full consciousness of what he was doing , `` to fuse political purpose and artistic purpose into one whole '' .
The original title was Animal Farm : A Fairy Story ; U.S. publishers dropped the subtitle when it was published in 1946 , and only one of the translations during Orwell 's lifetime kept it .
Other titular variations include subtitles like `` A Satire '' and `` A Contemporary Satire '' .
Orwell suggested the title Union des républiques socialistes animales for the French translation , which abbreviates to URSA , the Latin word for `` bear '' , a symbol of Russia .
It also played on the French name of the Soviet Union , Union des républiques socialistes soviétiques .
Orwell wrote the book between November 1943 and February 1944 , when the UK was in its wartime alliance with the Soviet Union and the British people and intelligentsia held Stalin in high esteem , a phenomenon Orwell hated .
The manuscript was initially rejected by a number of British and American publishers , including one of Orwell 's own , Victor Gollancz , which delayed its publication .
It became a great commercial success when it did appear partly because international relations were transformed as the wartime alliance gave way to the Cold War .
Time magazine chose the book as one of the 100 best English-language novels -LRB- 1923 to 2005 -RRB- ; it also featured at number 31 on the Modern Library List of Best 20th-Century Novels .
It won a Retrospective Hugo Award in 1996 , and is included in the Great Books of the Western World selection .