Anne -LRB- 6 February 1665 -- 1 August 1714 -RRB- became Queen of England , Scotland and Ireland on 8 March 1702 .
On 1 May 1707 , under the Acts of Union , two of her realms , the kingdoms of England and Scotland , united as a single sovereign state known as Great Britain .
She continued to reign as Queen of Great Britain and Ireland until her death .
Anne was born in the reign of her uncle Charles II , who had no legitimate children .
Her father , James , was first in line to the throne .
His suspected Roman Catholicism was unpopular in England , and on Charles 's instructions Anne was raised as an Anglican .
Three years after he succeeded Charles , James was deposed in the `` Glorious Revolution '' of 1688 .
Anne 's Dutch Protestant brother-in-law and cousin William III became joint monarch with his wife , Anne 's elder sister Mary II .
Although the sisters had been close , disagreements over Anne 's finances , status and choice of acquaintances arose shortly after Mary 's accession and they became estranged .
William and Mary had no children .
After Mary 's death in 1694 , William continued as sole monarch until he was succeeded by Anne upon his death in 1702 .
As queen , Anne favoured moderate Tory politicians , who were more likely to share her Anglican religious views than their opponents , the Whigs .
The Whigs grew more powerful during the course of the War of the Spanish Succession , until in 1710 Anne dismissed many of them from office .
Her close friendship with Sarah Churchill , Duchess of Marlborough , turned sour as the result of political differences .
Anne was plagued by ill health throughout her life .
From her thirties onwards , she grew increasingly lame and obese .
Despite seventeen pregnancies by her husband , Prince George of Denmark , she died without any surviving children and was the last monarch of the House of Stuart .
Under the terms of the Act of Settlement 1701 , she was succeeded by her second cousin George I of the House of Hanover , who was a descendant of the Stuarts through his maternal grandmother , Elizabeth , a daughter of James VI and I.