Anne Rice -LRB- born Howard Allen Frances O'Brien ; October 4 , 1941 -RRB- is an American author of gothic fiction , Christian literature , and erotica .
She is perhaps best known for her popular and influential series of novels , The Vampire Chronicles , revolving around the central character of Lestat .
Books from The Vampire Chronicles were the subject of two film adaptations , Interview with the Vampire in 1994 , and Queen of the Damned in 2002 .
Born in New Orleans , Rice spent much of her early life there before moving to Texas , and later to San Francisco .
She was raised in an observant Catholic family , but became an agnostic as a young adult .
She began her professional writing career with the publication of Interview with the Vampire in 1976 , while living in California , and began writing sequels to the novel in the 1980s .
In the mid-2000s , following a publicized return to Catholicism , Rice published the novels Christ the Lord : Out of Egypt and Christ the Lord : The Road to Cana , fictionalized accounts of certain incidents in the life of Jesus .
Several years later she distanced herself from organized Christianity , citing disagreement with the Church 's stances on social issues but pledging that faith in God remained `` central to -LSB- her -RSB- life . ''
However , she now considers herself a secular humanist .
Rice 's books have sold nearly 100 million copies , placing her among the most popular authors in recent American history .
While reaction to her early works was initially mixed , she became more popular with critics and readers in the 1980s .
Her writing style and the literary content of her works have been deeply analyzed by literary commentators .
She was married to poet and painter Stan Rice for 41 years , from 1961 until his death from brain cancer in 2002 at age 60 .
She and Stan had two children , Michele , who died of leukemia at age five , and Christopher , who is also an author .
In addition to her vampire novels , Rice has authored books such as The Feast of All Saints -LRB- adapted for television in 2001 -RRB- and Servant of the Bones , which formed the basis of a 2011 comic book miniseries .
Several books from The Vampire Chronicles have been adapted as comics by various publishers .
Rice has also authored erotic fiction under the pen names Anne Rampling and A. N. Roquelaure , including Exit to Eden , which was later adapted into a 1994 film .