Ann `` Annie '' Lennox , -LRB- born 25 December 1954 -RRB- is a Scottish singer , songwriter , political activist and philanthropist .
After achieving moderate success in the late 1970s as part of the new wave band The Tourists , she and fellow musician David A. Stewart went on to achieve major international success in the 1980s as Eurythmics .
With a total of eight Brit Awards , including Best British Female Artist six times , Lennox has won more than any other female artist .
She has also been named the `` Brits Champion of Champions '' .
Lennox embarked on a solo career in 1992 with her debut album , Diva , which produced several hit singles including `` Why '' and `` Walking on Broken Glass '' .
To date , she has released six solo studio albums and a compilation album , The Annie Lennox Collection -LRB- 2009 -RRB- .
Aside from her eight Brit Awards , she has also collected four Grammy Awards and an MTV Video Music Award .
In 2002 , Lennox received a Billboard Century Award ; the highest accolade from Billboard Magazine .
In 2004 , she won both the Golden Globe and the Academy Award for Best Original Song for `` Into the West '' , written for the soundtrack to the feature film The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King .
In addition to her career as a musician , Lennox is also a political and social activist , notable for raising money and awareness for HIV / AIDS as it affects women and children in Africa .
In 2011 , Lennox was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II for her `` tireless charity campaigns and championing of humanitarian causes '' .
On 4 June 2012 she performed at the Queen 's Diamond Jubilee Concert in front of Buckingham Palace .
Lennox performed the song `` Little Bird '' during the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony in London on 12 August 2012 .
Lennox has been named `` The Greatest White Soul Singer Alive '' by VH1 and one of The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time by Rolling Stone .
In 2012 , she was rated No. 22 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Women in Music .
She has earned the distinction of `` most successful female British artist in UK music history '' due to her commercial success since the early 1980s .
, including her work within Eurythmics , Lennox had sold over 80 million records worldwide .