Antarctica -LRB- UK English -LSB- ænˈtɑːktɪkə -RSB- or -LSB- ænˈtɑːtɪkə -RSB- , US English -LSB- æntˈɑːrktɪkə -RSB- -RRB- is Earth 's southernmost continent .
It contains the geographic South Pole and is situated in the Antarctic region of the Southern Hemisphere , almost entirely south of the Antarctic Circle , and is surrounded by the Southern Ocean .
At 14000000 km2 , it is the fifth-largest continent .
For comparison , Antarctica is nearly twice the size of Australia .
About 98 % of Antarctica is covered by ice that averages 1.9 km in thickness , which extends to all but the northernmost reaches of the Antarctic Peninsula .
Antarctica , on average , is the coldest , driest , and windiest continent , and has the highest average elevation of all the continents .
Antarctica is a desert , with annual precipitation of only 200 mm -LRB- 8 in -RRB- along the coast and far less inland .
The temperature in Antarctica has reached − 89.2 ° C -LRB- − 128.6 ° F -RRB- , though the average for the third quarter -LRB- the coldest part of the year -RRB- is − 63 ° C -LRB- − 81 ° F -RRB- .
Anywhere from 1,000 to 5,000 people reside throughout the year at the research stations scattered across the continent .
Organisms native to Antarctica include many types of algae , bacteria , fungi , plants , protista , and certain animals , such as mites , nematodes , penguins , seals and tardigrades .
Vegetation , where it occurs , is tundra .
Although myths and speculation about a Terra Australis -LRB- `` Southern Land '' -RRB- date back to antiquity , Antarctica is noted as the last region on Earth in recorded history to be discovered and colonised by humans , being only first sighted in 1820 by the Russian expedition of Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen and Mikhail Lazarev on Vostok and Mirny , who sighted the Fimbul ice shelf .
The continent , however , remained largely neglected for the rest of the 19th century because of its hostile environment , lack of easily accessible resources , and isolation .
In 1895 , the first confirmed landing was conducted by a team of Norwegians .
Antarctica is a de facto condominium , governed by parties to the Antarctic Treaty System that have consulting status .
Twelve countries signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1959 , and thirty-eight have signed it since then .
The treaty prohibits military activities and mineral mining , prohibits nuclear explosions and nuclear waste disposal , supports scientific research , and protects the continent 's ecozone .
Ongoing experiments are conducted by more than 4,000 scientists from many nations .