Anthony Paul Meindl -LRB- born January 14 , 1968 -RRB- is an American screenwriter , stage and film actor , and founder and artistic director at the MetaTheatre Company and Anthony Meindl 's Actor Workshop in Los Angeles .
The workshop has since expanded to locations in New York City , London , Sydney , Melbourne , and Vancouver .
In the 1990s , Meindl played a character who was a genie named `` Hard Hat Harry '' in a number of video cassettes and DVDs aimed at introducing children to trucks , cars , construction vehicles , and others -LRB- usually using the name `` Anthony Paul '' -RRB- .
He worked and lived in New York in the early 1990s and moved to Los Angeles in 1997 .
He has been in many commercials for products and companies including Diet Coke , Philips Electronics , Bank of America , Nissan , Michelob Lite , Sears , Acura , Del Taco , Mervyns , and Behr Paint .
He has also appeared in non-Broadway stage productions of Titus Andronicus , Merrily We Roll Along , and the LA Weekly Award-nominated Cabaret .
He is openly gay .
His film credits are almost exclusively gay-related , including the 1997 gay-themed drama David Searching , the 1998 gay-themed drama Minor Details , and the 2000 gay-themed comedy/drama Get Your Stuff .
His latest film role was in the 2005 mystery comedy Death of a Saleswoman .
He also appeared in a 1998 episode of Will & Grace .
He has coached and worked with Shailene Woodley , Ashley Greene , Agnes Bruckner , Nick Robinson , Chace Crawford , Cory Monteith , Dania Ramirez , Sasha Alexander , Chris Owen , Stevie Lynn Jones , Dree Hemingway , Michael Lomenda , JC Chasez , China Chow , Brock Kelly , Judith Hill , Samantha Mumba , Rocco DiSpirito , Olivia Holt , Ian Harding , Alexandra Daddario , Edy Ganem , Trevor Donovan , Daniel Cudmore , Charlie Bewley , Ashton Holmes , Larissa Oleynik , Lorenza Izzo , Carmen Electra , Allison Miller , Jenna Dewan-Tatum , Lucy Fry , Josh Zuckerman , Sadie Calvano , Taryn Southern , Ryan Rottman , Chaz Bono , Jill Wagner , Joe Slaughter , Mark Hapka , Matt Dallas , Brad Rowe , and Quddus Phillippe .
Meindl 's first feature screenplay , The Wonder Girls , was the Grand Prize Winning Feature Screenplay in the Slamdance Film Festival Screenplay Competition in 2007 .
He was nominated as Best Director for the LA Weekly Awards two years in a row for Best Comedy -LRB- Swimming In The Shallows -RRB- and Best Drama -LRB- Dogs Barking -RRB- .
The casts for both shows -LRB- members of MetaTheatre Company , his acting studio -RRB- were also nominated as Best Ensemble in a Comedy and Best Ensemble in a Drama .
His first short , `` Ready ?
OK ! ''
, played in over a dozen International Film Festivals , winning numerous `` Best of '' Awards and premiered on MTV 's LOGO Network in 2009 as part of their `` Click List : Best In Short Film Series . ''
It won the 2008 Planet Out Scion Viewer 's Choice Short Film Awards .
Meindl 's first feature film , Birds of A Feather -LRB- 2011 -RRB- won him Best Director awards at the 2012 Downtown LA Film Festival and the 2013 Golden Door Film Festival and the Spirit of the Festival Award at the 2012 Honolulu Rainbow Film Festival .
The film features Academy Award winner , Olympia Dukakis , Bruce Vilanch and Trevor Donovan .
He is a regular contributor to The Huffington Post , The Daily Love , and Backstage .