Anxiety is an emotion characterized by an unpleasant state of inner turmoil , often accompanied by nervous behavior , such as pacing back and forth , somatic complaints , and rumination .
It is the subjectively unpleasant feelings of dread over anticipated events , such as the feeling of imminent death .
Anxiety is not the same as fear , which is a response to a real or perceived immediate threat , whereas anxiety is the expectation of future threat .
Anxiety is a feeling of uneasiness and worry , usually generalized and unfocused as an overreaction to a situation that is only subjectively seen as menacing .
It is often accompanied by muscular tension , restlessness , fatigue and problems in concentration .
Anxiety can be appropriate , but when experienced regularly the individual may suffer from an anxiety disorder .
People facing anxiety may withdraw from situations which have provoked anxiety in the past .
There are various types of anxiety .
Existential anxiety can occur when a person faces angst , an existential crisis , or nihilistic feelings .
People can also face mathematical anxiety , somatic anxiety , stage fright , or test anxiety .
Social anxiety and stranger anxiety are caused when people are apprehensive around strangers or other people in general .
Furthermore , anxiety has been linked with physical symptoms such as IBS and can heighten other mental health illnesses such as OCD and panic disorder .
The first step in the management of a person with anxiety symptoms is to evaluate the possible presence of an underlying medical cause , whose recognition is essential in order to decide its correct treatment .
Anxiety symptoms may be masking an organic disease , or appear associated or as a result of a medical disorder .
Anxiety can be either a short term `` state '' or a long term `` trait '' .
Whereas trait anxiety represents worrying about future events , anxiety disorders are a group of mental disorders characterized by feelings of anxiety and fear .
Anxiety disorders are partly genetic but may also be due to drug use , including alcohol , caffeine , and benzodiazepines -LRB- which are often prescribed to treat anxiety -RRB- , as well as withdrawal from drugs of abuse .
They often occur with other mental disorders , particularly bipolar disorder , eating disorders , major depressive disorder , or certain personality disorders .
Common treatment options include lifestyle changes , medication , and therapy .