Apple Store is a chain of retail stores owned and operated by Apple Inc. .
The stores sell Mac personal computers , iPhone smartphones , iPad tablet computers , iPod portable media players , Apple Watch smartwatches , Apple TV digital media players , software , and select third-party accessories .
The first Apple Stores were originally opened as two locations in May 2001 by then-CEO Steve Jobs , after years of attempting but failing store-within-a-store concepts .
Seeing a need for improved retail presentation of the company 's products , he began an effort in 1997 to revamp the retail program to get an improved relationship to consumers , and hired Ron Johnson in 2000 .
Jobs relaunched Apple 's online store in 1997 , and opened the first two physical stores in 2001 .
Despite initial media speculation that Apple would fail , its stores were highly successful , bypassing the sales numbers of competing nearby stores and within three years reached US$ 1 billion in annual sales , becoming the fastest retailer in history to do so .
Over the years , Apple has expanded the number of retail locations and its geographical coverage , with 496 stores across 21 countries worldwide as of May 2017 .
Strong product sales have placed Apple among the top-tier retail stores , with sales over $ 16 billion globally in 2011 .
In May 2016 , Angela Ahrendts , Apple 's current Senior Vice President of Retail , unveiled a significantly redesigned Apple Store in Union Square , San Francisco , featuring large glass doors for the entry , open spaces , and rebranded rooms .
In addition to purchasing products , consumers can get advice and help from `` Creative Pros '' - individuals with specialized knowledge of creative arts ; get product support in a tree-lined Genius Grove ; and attend sessions , conferences and community events , with Ahrendts commenting that the goal is to make Apple Stores into `` town squares '' , a place where people naturally meet up and spend time .
The new design will be applied to all Apple Stores worldwide , a process that has seen stores temporarily relocate or close .
Many Apple Stores are located inside shopping malls , but Apple has built several stand-alone `` flagship '' stores in high-profile locations .
It has been granted design patents and received architectural awards for its stores ' designs and construction , specifically for its use of glass staircases and cubes .
The success of Apple Stores have had significant influence over other consumer electronics retailers , who have lost traffic , control and profits due to a perceived higher quality of service and products at Apple Stores .
Apple 's notable brand loyalty have historically caused long lines of hundreds of people at new Apple Store openings or product releases .
Due to the popularity of the brand , there are numerous job applications , many of which from young workers .
Although Apple Store employees receive above-average pay , are offered money toward education and health care , and receive product discounts , there are limited or no paths of career advancement .
A May 2016 report with an anonymous retail employee highlighted a hostile work environment with harassment from customers , intense internal criticism , and a lack of significant bonuses for securing major business contracts .