Ares -LRB- -LSB- ˈɛəriːz -RSB- Ἄρης -LSB- árɛːs -RSB- -RRB- is the Greek god of war .
He is one of the Twelve Olympians , and the son of Zeus and Hera .
In Greek literature , he often represents the physical or violent and untamed aspect of war , in contrast to his sister the armored Athena , whose functions as a goddess of intelligence include military strategy and generalship .
The Greeks were ambivalent toward Ares : although he embodied the physical valor necessary for success in war , he was a dangerous force , `` overwhelming , insatiable in battle , destructive , and man-slaughtering . ''
His sons Phobos -LRB- Fear -RRB- and Deimos -LRB- Terror -RRB- and his lover , or sister , Enyo -LRB- Discord -RRB- accompanied him on his war chariot .
In the Iliad , his father Zeus tells him that he is the god most hateful to him .
An association with Ares endows places and objects with a savage , dangerous , or militarized quality .
His value as a war god is placed in doubt : during the Trojan War , Ares was on the losing side , while Athena , often depicted in Greek art as holding Nike -LRB- Victory -RRB- in her hand , favoured the triumphant Greeks .
Ares plays a relatively limited role in Greek mythology as represented in literary narratives , though his numerous love affairs and abundant offspring are often alluded to .
When Ares does appear in myths , he typically faces humiliation .
He is well known as the lover of Aphrodite , the goddess of love , who was married to Hephaestus , god of craftsmanship .
The most famous story related to Ares and Aphrodite shows them exposed to ridicule through the wronged husband 's device .
The counterpart of Ares among the Roman gods is Mars , who as a father of the Roman people was given a more important and dignified place in ancient Roman religion as a guardian deity .
During the Hellenization of Latin literature , the myths of Ares were reinterpreted by Roman writers under the name of Mars .
Greek writers under Roman rule also recorded cult practices and beliefs pertaining to Mars under the name of Ares .
Thus in the classical tradition of later Western art and literature , the mythology of the two figures becomes virtually indistinguishable .