Arizona -LRB- -LSB- ɛərᵻˈzoʊnə , _ ærᵻ - -RSB- -RRB- -LRB- Hoozdo Hahoodzo -LSB- xòːztò xɑ̀xòːtsò -RSB- O'odham : Alĭ ṣonak -LSB- ˡaɺi ˡʃonak -RSB- -RRB- is a state in the southwestern region of the United States .
It is also part of the Western and the Mountain states .
It is the sixth largest and the 14th most populous of the 50 states .
Its capital and largest city is Phoenix .
Arizona is one of the Four Corners states .
It has borders with New Mexico , Utah , Nevada , California , and Mexico , and one point in common with the southwestern corner of Colorado .
Arizona 's border with Mexico is 389 miles -LRB- 626 km -RRB- long , on the northern border of the Mexican states of Sonora and Baja California .
Arizona is the 48th state and last of the contiguous states to be admitted to the Union , achieving statehood on February 14 , 1912 .
Historically part of the territory of Alta California in New Spain , it became part of independent Mexico in 1821 .
After being defeated in the Mexican -- American War , Mexico ceded much of this territory to the United States in 1848 .
The southernmost portion of the state was acquired in 1853 through the Gadsden Purchase .
Southern Arizona is known for its desert climate , with very hot summers and mild winters .
Northern Arizona features forests of pine , Douglas fir , and spruce trees ; the Colorado Plateau ; some mountain ranges -LRB- such as the San Francisco Mountains -RRB- ; as well as large , deep canyons , with much more moderate summer temperatures and significant winter snowfalls .
There are ski resorts in the areas of Flagstaff , Alpine , and Tucson .
In addition to the Grand Canyon National Park , there are several national forests , national parks , and national monuments .
About one-quarter of the state is made up of Indian reservations that serve as the home of 27 federally recognized Native American tribes , including the Navajo Nation , the largest in the state and the United States , with more than 300,000 citizens .
Although federal law gave all Native Americans the right to vote in 1924 , Arizona excluded those living on reservations from voting until its state Supreme Court ruled in 1948 in favor of Native American plaintiffs .