Artpop -LRB- stylized as ARTPOP -RRB- is the third studio album by American singer Lady Gaga , released on November 6 , 2013 , by Streamline and Interscope Records .
Gaga began planning the project in 2011 , shortly after the launch of her second studio album , Born This Way .
Work continued until 2013 while Gaga was traveling for her Born This Way Ball concert tour and recovering from surgery for an injury she had sustained while touring .
Gaga described Artpop as `` a celebration and a poetic musical journey '' and an exploration of the `` reverse Warholian '' phenomenon in pop culture .
It displays an intentional `` lack of maturity and responsibility '' by comparison to the darker and anthemic nature of Born This Way .
Gaga collaborated with longtime partners Paul `` DJ White Shadow '' Blair and RedOne and new partners Zedd and Madeon .
The lyrical themes revolve around her personal views of fame , love , sex , feminism , self-empowerment , overcoming addiction , and reactions to media scrutiny ; references include Greek and Roman mythology , and classic jazz and electronic musician Sun Ra .
Artpop also features guest vocals from T.I. , Too Short , Twista , and R. Kelly .
The release of Artpop was prefaced by a two-day album release party dubbed an `` ArtRave '' .
The album received generally mixed reviews from music critics , but was commercially successful , debuting at number one on the United States Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 258,000 copies , becoming Gaga 's second consecutive number-one record in the United States and selling 757,000 copies .
It also topped national record charts in five additional countries , and charted within the top ten in over twenty .
Artpop was the ninth best seller album of 2013 with 2.3 million copies worldwide .
It was included in several year-end lists by music critics and publications .
`` Applause '' was released as the lead single from Artpop on August 12 , 2013 , and was a critical and commercial success , charting within the top ten of more than twenty countries worldwide , peaking at number four on the US Billboard Hot 100 .
The second single `` Do What U Want '' was released on October 21 , and peaked at number 13 in the United States .
It was followed by promotional singles `` Venus '' and `` Dope '' shortly before the album 's release .
`` G.U.Y. '' was the third and last single released from the album .
Gaga promoted Artpop with several television appearances and performances , including her second Thanksgiving Day special .
She also embarked on the ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour in support of the album .