Asia is Earth 's largest and most populous continent , located primarily in the eastern and northern hemispheres and sharing the continental landmass of Eurasia with the continent of Europe and shares the continental landmass of Afro-Eurasia with both Europe and Africa .
Asia covers an area of 44,579,000 km2 , about 30 % of Earth 's total land area and 8.7 % of the Earth 's total surface area .
The continent , which has long been home to the majority of the human population , was the site of many of the first civilizations .
Asia is notable for not only its overall large size and population , but also dense and large settlements as well as vast barely populated regions within the continent of 4.4 billion people .
In general terms , Asia is bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean , on the south by the Indian Ocean and on the north by the Arctic Ocean .
The western boundary with Europe is a historical and cultural construct , as there is no clear physical and geographical separation between them .
The most commonly accepted boundaries place Asia to the east of the Suez Canal , the Ural River , and the Ural Mountains , and south of the Caucasus Mountains and the Caspian and Black Seas .
China and India alternated in being the largest economies in the world from 1 to 1800 CE .
China was a major economic power and attracted many to the east , and for many the legendary wealth and prosperity of the ancient culture of India personified Asia , attracting European commerce , exploration and colonialism .
The accidental discovery of America by Columbus in search for India demonstrates this deep fascination .
The Silk Road became the main East-West trading route in the Asian hitherland while the Straits of Malacca stood as a major sea route .
Asia has exhibited economic dynamism -LRB- particularly East Asia -RRB- as well as robust population growth during the 20th century , but overall population growth has since fallen .
Asia was the birthplace of most of the world 's mainstream religions including Christianity , Islam , Judaism , Hinduism , Buddhism , Confucianism , Taoism -LRB- or Daoism -RRB- , Jainism , Sikhism , Zoroastranism , as well as many other religions .
Given its size and diversity , the concept of Asia -- a name dating back to classical antiquity -- may actually have more to do with human geography than physical geography .
Asia varies greatly across and within its regions with regard to ethnic groups , cultures , environments , economics , historical ties and government systems .
It also has a mix of many different climates ranging from the equatorial south via the hot desert in the Middle East , temperate areas in the east and the continental centre to vast subarctic and polar areas in Siberia .