Augustus -LRB- -LSB- Imperator , Imperātor Caesar Divi filius , Dīvī Fīlius Augustus -LRB- honorific -RRB- , Augustus -RSB- Classical Latin spelling and reconstructed Classical Latin pronunciation of the names of Augustus :
-LSB- ˈɡaː.i.ʊs ɔkˈtaː.wi.ʊs -RSB-
-LSB- ˈɡaː.i.ʊs ˈjuː.li.ʊs ˈkae̯.sar ɔk.taː.wiˈaː.nʊs -RSB-
-LSB- ɪm.pɛˈraː.tɔr ˈkae̯.sar ˈdiː.wiː ˈfiː.li.ʊs au̯ˈgʊs.tʊs -RSB-
The spelling , indicating the pronunciation -LSB- aˈgʊs.tʊs -RSB- , occurs in inscriptions .
-LSB- Imperator Caesar Divi Filius Augustus , -RSB- means `` Commander Caesar , Son of the God -LSB- Julius Caesar -RSB- , the Venerable '' .
23 September 63 BC -- 19 August 14 AD -RRB- was the founder of the Roman Principate and considered the first Roman emperor , controlling the Roman Empire from 27 BC until his death in AD 14 .
The dates of his rule are contemporary dates ; Augustus lived under two calendars , the Roman Republican until 45 BC , and the Julian after 45 BC .
Due to departures from Julius Caesar 's intentions , Augustus finished restoring the Julian calendar in March AD 4 , and the correspondence between the proleptic Julian calendar and the calendar observed in Rome is uncertain before 8 BC .
-LRB- Blackburn & Holford-Strevens 2003 : 670 -- 1 -RRB-
He was born Gaius Octavius into an old and wealthy equestrian branch of the plebeian gens Octavia .
His maternal great-uncle Julius Caesar was assassinated in 44 BC , and Octavius was named in Caesar 's will as his adopted son and heir , then known as Octavianus -LRB- Anglicized as Octavian -RRB- .
He , Mark Antony , and Marcus Lepidus formed the Second Triumvirate to defeat the assassins of Caesar .
Following their victory at the Battle of Philippi , the Triumvirate divided the Roman Republic among themselves and ruled as military dictators.As part of the Triumvirate , Octavian ruled the Western provinces , Antony ruled the Eastern provinces , and Lepidus ruled Africa .
The Triumvirate was eventually torn apart by the competing ambitions of its members .
Lepidus was driven into exile and stripped of his position , and Antony committed suicide following his defeat at the Battle of Actium by Octavian in 31 BC .
After the demise of the Second Triumvirate , Augustus restored the outward façade of the free Republic , with governmental power vested in the Roman Senate , the executive magistrates , and the legislative assemblies .
In reality , however , he retained his autocratic power over the Republic as a military dictator .
By law , Augustus held a collection of powers granted to him for life by the Senate , including supreme military command , and those of tribune and censor .
It took several years for Augustus to develop the framework within which a formally republican state could be led under his sole rule .
He rejected monarchical titles , and instead called himself Princeps Civitatis -LRB- `` First Citizen of the State '' -RRB- .
The resulting constitutional framework became known as the Principate , the first phase of the Roman Empire .
The reign of Augustus initiated an era of relative peace known as the Pax Romana -LRB- The Roman Peace -RRB- .
The Roman world was largely free from large-scale conflict for more than two centuries , despite continuous wars of imperial expansion on the Empire 's frontiers and the year-long civil war known as the `` Year of the Four Emperors '' over the imperial succession .
Augustus dramatically enlarged the Empire , annexing Egypt , Dalmatia , Pannonia , Noricum , and Raetia ; expanding possessions in Africa ; expanding into Germania ; and completing the conquest of Hispania .
Beyond the frontiers , he secured the Empire with a buffer region of client states and made peace with the Parthian Empire through diplomacy .
He reformed the Roman system of taxation , developed networks of roads with an official courier system , established a standing army , established the Praetorian Guard , created official police and fire-fighting services for Rome , and rebuilt much of the city during his reign .
Augustus died in AD 14 at the age of 75 .
He probably died from natural causes , although there were unconfirmed rumors that his wife Livia poisoned him .
He was succeeded as Emperor by his adopted son -LRB- also stepson and former son-in-law -RRB- Tiberius .