Avenged Sevenfold -LRB- sometimes abbreviated as A7X -RRB- is an American heavy metal band from Huntington Beach , California , formed in 1999 .
The band 's current lineup consists of lead vocalist M. Shadows , rhythm guitarist and backing vocalist Zacky Vengeance , lead guitarist and backing vocalist Synyster Gates , bassist and backing vocalist Johnny Christ , and drummer Brooks Wackerman .
Avenged Sevenfold is known for its diverse rock sound and dramatic imagery in album covers and merchandise .
Avenged Sevenfold emerged with a metalcore sound on the band 's debut Sounding the Seventh Trumpet .
However , Avenged Sevenfold 's style had evolved by the band 's third album and first major label release , City of Evil , into a heavy metal and hard rock style .
The band continued to explore new sounds with its self-titled release and enjoyed continued mainstream success before their drummer , James `` The Rev '' Sullivan , died in 2009 .
Despite his death , Avenged Sevenfold continued on with the help of now-former Dream Theater drummer Mike Portnoy and released and toured in support of its fifth album Nightmare in 2010 , which debuted on the top spot of the Billboard 200 , Avenged Sevenfold 's first number one debut .
In 2011 drummer Arin Ilejay joined the band on tours and recording .
Avenged Sevenfold 's sixth studio album Hail to the King , which was released in 2013 , marked the only Avenged Sevenfold album featuring Arin Ilejay .
Hail to the King charted as number 1 on the Billboard 200 , the UK Albums chart , as well as the Finnish , Brazilian , Canadian , and Irish charts .
In late 2014 Ilejay left the band , and was replaced by former Bad Religion drummer Brooks Wackerman , but was n't revealed as his replacement until in 2015 the band announced Ilejay 's departure .
The band surprise released their seventh studio album titled The Stage on October 28 , 2016 , which debuted as number 4 on the Billboard 200 chart in the US .
The Stage is their first conceptual album and it marked another stylistic change for the band , moving towards the progressive metal sound .
To date , Avenged Sevenfold has released seven studio albums , one live album/DVD , two compilation albums and eighteen singles and have sold over 8 million albums worldwide .
Avenged Sevenfold was ranked # 47 on Loudwire 's list of Top 50 Metal Bands of All Time .