Baahubali : The Beginning -LRB- stylized as bãhubali ; The One with Strong Arms -RRB- is a 2015 Indian epic historical fiction film directed by S. S. Rajamouli .
The film was produced by Shobu Yarlagadda and Prasad Devineni and was simultaneously shot in Telugu and Tamil .
The film stars Prabhas , Rana Daggubati , Anushka Shetty and Tamannaah in the lead roles , with Ramya Krishnan , Sathyaraj , and Nassar in supporting roles .
The first of two cinematic parts , The Beginning is a tale of the lost rightful heir of the fictional kingdom of Mahishmati , who learns about his true identity while falling in love with a rebellious warrior , who -LRB- among with her group -RRB- intends to rescue the former queen of Mahismati .
The film was conceived by Rajamouli 's father K. V. Vijayendra Prasad , who randomly told him a story about Sivagami , a woman who carries a baby in her hand while crossing a river , and a few years later about Kattapa , which intrigued Rajamouli .
His fascination with mythology and the tales of Amar Chitra Katha comics further fueled his interest in the story .
However , it took the writers three months to finalise the final draft .
The soundtrack and background score were composed by M. M. Keeravani while the cinematography , production design , and VFX were handled by K. K. Senthil Kumar , Sabu Cyril and V. Srinivas Mohan respectively .
The film was made on a budget of 1.8 billion , making it the most expensive Indian film at its time of release .
The film opened worldwide on 10 July 2015 , garnering critical acclaim and record breaking box office success .
With the worldwide box office gross of 6.5 billion , it became the highest grossing film in India and the third-highest grossing Indian film worldwide , and the highest-grossing South Indian film at the time of its release .
Its Hindi dubbed version also broke several records by becoming the highest grossing dubbed film in India .
Both budget and box office records since has been surpassed by its sequel , Baahubali 2 : The Conclusion .
The Beginning is the highest grossing Indian film of 2015 and the fourth highest grossing Indian film of all time .
It received several accolades .
It won the National Film Award for Best Special Effects and Best Feature Film , becoming the first Telugu film to win the award .
At the 63rd Filmfare Awards South , the Telugu version won five awards from ten nominations , including Best Film , Best Director for Rajamouli and Best Supporting Actress for Krishnan .
The Beginning became the first Indian film to be nominated for Saturn Awards , receiving five nominations at the 42nd ceremony , including Best Fantasy Film and Best Supporting Actress for Tamannaah .
The film 's second and final cinematic part was released on 28 April 2017 .