Babur -LRB- -LSB- بابر , lit = Tiger , translit = Bābur -RSB- 14 February 148326 December 1530 -RRB- , born Ẓahīr-ud-Dīn Muḥammad -LRB- -LSB- ظهیرالدین محمد , translit = Ẓahīr ad-Dīn Muḥammad -RSB- -RRB- , was a conqueror from Central Asia who , following a series of setbacks , finally succeeded in laying the basis for the Mughal dynasty in the Indian subcontinent and became the first Mughal emperor .
He was a direct descendant of Turco-Mongol conqueror Timur -LRB- Tamurlane -RRB- from the Barlas clan , through his father , and also a descendant of Genghis Khan through his mother .
He was also influenced by the Persian culture and this affected both his own actions and those of his successors , giving rise to a significant expansion of the Persianate ethos in the Indian subcontinent .
Babur was the eldest son of Umar Sheikh Mirza .
He ascended the throne of Fergana in 1495 at the age of twelve and faced rebellion from his own relatives .
He conquered Samarkand two years later , only to lose the city of Fergana soon after .
In his attempt to reconquer Fergana , he lost control of Samarkand .
In 1501 , his attempt to recapture both cities went in vain as he was defeated by Muhammad Shaybani Khan .
In 1504 , he conquered Kabul , which was under the rule of the infant heir of Ulugh Begh .
Babur formed a partnership with Safavid ruler Ismail I and reconquered parts of central Asia , including Samarkand , only to again lose it and the other newly conquered lands to the Uzbeks .
After losing Samarkand for the third time , Babur turned his attention to creating his empire in north India .
At that time , the Indo-Gangetic Plain of the northern Indian Subcontinent was ruled by Ibrahim Lodi of the Afghan Lodi dynasty , whereas Rajputana was ruled by a Hindu Rajput Confederacy , led by Rana Sanga of Mewar .
In 1524 , Daulat Khan Lodi , a rebel of the Lodhi dynasty , invited Babur to overthrow Ibrahim and become ruler .
Babur defeated Ibrahim Lodi at the First Battle of Panipat in 1526 and founded the Mughal empire .
However , he again faced opposition , this time from Rana Sanga of Mewar who considered Babur a foreigner .
The Rana was defeated at the Battle of Khanwa .
Babur married several times .
Notable among his sons are Humayun , Kamran Mirza and Hindal Mirza .
Babur died in 1530 and was succeeded by Humayun .
According to Babur 's wishes , he was buried in Bagh-e-Babur in Kabul , Afghanistan .
Being a patrilineal descendant of Timur , Babur considered himself a Timurid and Turk , though Uzbek sources claim him as an ethnic Uzbek .
He is considered a national hero in Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan .
Many of his poems also have become popular folk songs .
He wrote his autobiography , Baburnama , in Chaghatai Turkic and this was translated into Persian during Akbar 's reign .