`` Bad Romance '' is a song by American singer Lady Gaga from her third extended play , The Fame Monster -LRB- 2009 -RRB- .
It was written and produced by Gaga and RedOne .
Lyrically , `` Bad Romance '' explores Gaga 's attraction to individuals with whom romance never works , her preference for lonely relationships and the paranoia she experienced while on tour .
Following an illegal demo leak , Gaga showcased the final product at Alexander McQueen 's show at the Paris Fashion Week in October 2009 , followed by the release of the single 's cover art .
Musically , `` Bad Romance '' features a spoken bridge , a full-throated chorus and sung lyrics about being in love with one 's best friend .
The song , which is imbued with elements of Germanesque house and techno , as well as music from 1980s and the 1990s , was touted by Gaga as an experimental pop record .
The song contains a few lines in French .
Most commentators were enticed by `` Bad Romance '' , which they declared one of the highlights of The Fame Monster album .
It was included in the ` best-of ' lists in several media outlets such as Rolling Stone and Pitchfork Media , and acquired two Grammy Awards for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance and Best Short Form Music Video .
In the United States , `` Bad Romance '' peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 , and it has been certified eleven-times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- , having sold 5.6 million digital downloads as of April 2016 .
It achieved worldwide success by topping the charts in a variety of markets , ultimately selling 12 million copies worldwide , thus becoming one of the best-selling singles of all time .
The accompanying music video of `` Bad Romance '' features Gaga inside a surreal white bathhouse .
There , she gets kidnapped by a group of supermodels who drug her and sell her to the Russian mafia for sexual slavery .
The music video ends with Gaga burning the man alive who bought her .
The song 's video garnered acclaim from critics , who not only applauded the risqué and symbolic nature of the plot , but its artistic direction and vivid imagery .
In 2011 , the music video was voted the best video of the 2000s -LRB- decade -RRB- by readers of Billboard .
It was nominated for numerous superlatives , including ten awards at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , where the singer won seven , including a recognition for Video of the Year .
Gaga has performed `` Bad Romance '' on various television programs , such as Saturday Night Live , at various award ceremonies , such as the 2009 American Music Awards , and in three of her tours , the most recent being ArtRave : The Artpop Ball .