Bangladesh -LRB- -LSB- bæŋɡləˈdɛʃ -RSB- -LSB- ˌbɑːŋɡləˈdɛʃ -RSB- -LSB- : bn : বাংলাদেশ , বাংলাদেশ -RSB- , -LSB- ˈbaŋlad̪eʃ -RSB- , lit .
`` The country of Bengal '' -RRB- , officially the People 's Republic of Bangladesh , is a country in South Asia .
It shares land borders with India and Myanmar -LRB- Burma -RRB- .
Nepal , Bhutan and China are located near Bangladesh but do not share a border with it .
The country 's maritime territory in the Bay of Bengal is roughly equal to the size of its land area .
Bangladesh is the world 's eighth most populous country .
Dhaka is its capital and largest city , followed by Chittagong , which has the country 's largest port .
Bangladesh forms the largest and eastern part of the Bengal region .
Bangladeshis include people of different ethnic groups and religions .
Bengalis , who speak the official Bengali language , make up 98 % of the population .
The politically dominant Bengali Muslims make the nation the world 's third largest Muslim-majority country .
Most of Bangladesh is covered by the Bengal delta , the largest delta on Earth .
The country has 700 rivers and 8,046 km -LRB- 5,000 miles -RRB- of inland waterways .
Highlands with evergreen forests are found in the northeastern and southeastern regions of the country .
Bangladesh has many islands and a coral reef .
It is home to the Sundarbans , the largest mangrove forest in the world .
The country 's biodiversity includes a vast array of plant and wildlife , including critically endangered Bengal tigers , the national animal .
The Greeks and Romans identified the region as Gangaridai , a powerful kingdom of the historical subcontinent , in the 3rd century BCE .
Archaeological research has unearthed several ancient cities in Bangladesh , which had international trade links for millennia .
The Bengal Sultanate and Mughal Bengal transformed the region into a cosmopolitan Islamic imperial power between the 14th and 18th centuries .
The region was home to many principalities that had inland naval prowess .
It was also a notable center of the worldwide muslin and silk trade .
As part of British India , the region was influenced by the Bengali renaissance and played an important role in anti-colonial movements .
The Partition of British India made East Bengal a part of the Dominion of Pakistan ; and was renamed as East Pakistan .
The region witnessed the Bengali Language Movement in 1952 and the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971 .
After independence , a parliamentary republic was established .
A presidential government was in place between 1975 and 1990 , followed by a return to parliamentary democracy .
The country has also been affected by poverty , natural disasters , hunger , dominant party systems and military coups .
Bangladesh is a middle power and a major developing nation .
Within South Asia , the country ranks first in gender equality , second in foreign exchange earnings and third in life expectancy and peacefulness .
Listed as one of the Next Eleven , its economy ranks 46th in terms of nominal gross domestic product -LRB- GDP -RRB- and 29th in terms of purchasing power parity -LRB- PPP -RRB- .
It is one of the largest textile exporters in the world .
Its major trading partners are the European Union , the United States , China , India , Japan , Malaysia and Singapore .
With its strategically vital location between Southern , Eastern and Southeast Asia , Bangladesh is an important promoter of regional connectivity and cooperation .
It is a founding member of SAARC , BIMSTEC , the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar Forum for Regional Cooperation and the Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal Initiative .
It is also a member of the Commonwealth of Nations , the Developing 8 Countries , the OIC , the Non Aligned Movement , the Group of 77 and the World Trade Organization .
Bangladesh is one of the largest contributors to United Nations peacekeeping forces .