Barack Hussein Obama II -LRB- -LSB- bəˈrɑːk_huːˈseɪn_oʊˈbɑːmə -RSB- ; born August 4 , 1961 -RRB- is an American politician who served as the 44th President of the United States from 2009 to 2017 .
He is the first African American to have served as president .
He previously served in the U.S. Senate representing Illinois from 2005 to 2008 , and in the Illinois State Senate from 1997 to 2004 .
Obama was born in Honolulu , Hawaii , two years after the territory was admitted to the Union as the 50th state .
Raised largely in Hawaii , Obama also spent one year of his childhood in Washington State and four years in Indonesia .
After graduating from Columbia University in 1983 , he worked as a community organizer in Chicago .
In 1988 Obama enrolled in Harvard Law School , where he was the first black president of the Harvard Law Review .
After graduation , he became a civil rights attorney and professor , teaching constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School from 1992 to 2004 .
Obama represented the 13th District for three terms in the Illinois Senate from 1997 to 2004 , when he ran for the U.S. Senate .
Obama received national attention in 2004 , with his unexpected March primary win , his well-received July Democratic National Convention keynote address , and his landslide November election to the Senate .
In 2008 , Obama was nominated for president , a year after his campaign began , and after a close primary campaign against Hillary Clinton .
He was elected over Republican John McCain , and was inaugurated on January 20 , 2009 .
Nine months later , Obama was named the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize laureate .
During his first two years in office , Obama signed many landmark bills .
Main reforms were the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- often referred to as `` Obamacare '' -RRB- , the Dodd -- Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act , and the Do n't Ask , Do n't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 .
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and Tax Relief , Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization , and Job Creation Act of 2010 served as economic stimulus amidst the Great Recession , but the GOP regained control of the House of Representatives in 2011 .
After a lengthy debate over the national debt limit , Obama signed the Budget Control and the American Taxpayer Relief Acts .
In foreign policy , Obama increased U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan , reduced nuclear weapons with the U.S.-Russian New START treaty , and ended military involvement in the Iraq War .
He ordered military involvement in Libya in opposition to Muammar Gaddafi , and the military operation that resulted in the death of Osama bin Laden .
After winning re-election by defeating Republican nominee Mitt Romney , Obama was sworn in for a second term in 2013 .
During his second term , Obama promoted greater inclusiveness for LGBT Americans , with his administration filing briefs that urged the Supreme Court to strike down same-sex marriage bans as unconstitutional -LRB- United States v. Windsor and Obergefell v. Hodges -RRB- .
Obama also advocated gun control in response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting , and issued wide-ranging executive actions concerning climate change and immigration .
In foreign policy , Obama ordered military intervention in Iraq in response to gains made by ISIL after the 2011 withdrawal from Iraq , continued the process of ending U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan , promoted discussions that led to the 2015 Paris Agreement on global climate change , initiated the sanctions against Russia following the invasion in Ukraine , brokered a nuclear deal with Iran , and normalized U.S. relations with Cuba .
Obama left office in January 2017 with a 60 % approval rating .
He currently resides in Washington , D.C. His presidential library will be built in Chicago .