Barcelona -LRB- -LSB- bɑrsəˈloʊnə -RSB- , -LSB- bəɾsəˈlonə -RSB- , -LSB- barθeˈlona -RSB- -RRB- is the capital city of the autonomous community of Catalonia in the Kingdom of Spain , as well as the country 's second most populous municipality , with a population of 1.6 million within city limits .
Its urban area extends beyond the administrative city limits with a population of around 4.7 million people , being the sixth-most populous urban area in the European Union after Paris , London , Madrid , the Ruhr area and Milan .
It is the largest metropolis on the Mediterranean Sea , located on the coast between the mouths of the rivers Llobregat and Besòs , and bounded to the west by the Serra de Collserola mountain range , the tallest peak of which is 512 m high .
Founded as a Roman city , in the Middle Ages Barcelona became the capital of the County of Barcelona .
After merging with the Kingdom of Aragon , Barcelona continued to be an important city in the Crown of Aragon as an economic and administrative centre of this Crown and the capital of the Principality of Catalonia .
Barcelona has a rich cultural heritage and is today an important cultural centre and a major tourist destination .
Particularly renowned are the architectural works of Antoni Gaudí and Lluís Domènech i Montaner , which have been designated UNESCO World Heritage Sites .
The headquarters of the Union for the Mediterranean is located in Barcelona .
The city is known for hosting the 1992 Summer Olympics as well as world-class conferences and expositions and also many international sport tournaments .
Barcelona is one of the world 's leading tourist , economic , trade fair and cultural centres , and its influence in commerce , education , entertainment , media , fashion , science , and the arts all contribute to its status as one of the world 's major global cities .
It is a major cultural and economic centre in southwestern Europe , 24th in the world -LRB- before Zürich , after Frankfurt -RRB- and a financial centre .
In 2008 it was the fourth most economically powerful city by GDP in the European Union and 35th in the world with GDP amounting to $ 177 billion .
In 2012 Barcelona had a GDP of $ 170 billion ; it is leading Spain in both employment rate and GDP per capita change .
In 2009 the city was ranked Europe 's third and one of the world 's most successful as a city brand .
In the same year the city was ranked Europe 's fourth best city for business and fastest improving European city , with growth improved by 17 % per year , and the city has been experiencing strong and renewed growth for the past three years .
Since 2011 Barcelona has been a leading smart city in Europe .
Barcelona is a transport hub , with the Port of Barcelona being one of Europe 's principal seaports and busiest European passenger port , an international airport , Barcelona -- El Prat Airport , which handles over 40 million passengers per year , an extensive motorway network , and a high-speed rail line with a link to France and the rest of Europe .