Batman is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics .
The character was created by artist Bob Kane and writer Bill Finger , and first appeared in Detective Comics # 27 -LRB- 1939 -RRB- .
Originally named the `` Bat-Man '' , the character is also referred to by such epithets as the Caped Crusader , the Dark Knight , and the World 's Greatest Detective .
Batman 's secret identity is Bruce Wayne , a wealthy American playboy , philanthropist , and owner of Wayne Enterprises .
After witnessing the murder of his parents Dr. Thomas Wayne and Martha Wayne as a child , he swore vengeance against criminals , an oath tempered by a sense of justice .
Bruce Wayne trains himself physically and intellectually and crafts a bat-inspired persona to fight crime .
Batman operates in the fictional Gotham City with assistance from various supporting characters , including his butler Alfred , police commissioner Gordon , and vigilante allies such as Robin .
Unlike most superheroes , Batman does not possess any superpowers ; rather , he relies on his genius intellect , physical prowess , martial arts abilities , detective skills , science and technology , vast wealth , intimidation , and indomitable will .
A large assortment of villains make up Batman 's rogues gallery , including his archenemy , the Joker .
The character became popular soon after his introduction in 1939 and gained his own comic book title , Batman , the following year .
As the decades went on , differing interpretations of the character emerged .
The late 1960s Batman television series used a camp aesthetic , which continued to be associated with the character for years after the show ended .
Various creators worked to return the character to his dark roots , culminating in 1986 with The Dark Knight Returns by Frank Miller .
The success of Warner Bros. ' live-action Batman feature films have helped maintain the public 's interest in the character .
An American cultural icon , Batman has been licensed and adapted into a variety of media , from radio to television and film , and appears on various merchandise sold all over the world , such as toys and video games .
The character has also intrigued psychiatrists , with many trying to understand the character 's psyche .
In 2015 , FanSided ranked Batman as number one on their list of `` 50 Greatest Super Heroes In Comic Book History '' .
Kevin Conroy , Bruce Greenwood , Peter Weller , Anthony Ruivivar , Jason O'Mara , and Will Arnett , among others , have provided the character 's voice for animated adaptations .
Batman has been portrayed in both film and television by Lewis Wilson , Robert Lowery , Adam West , Michael Keaton , Val Kilmer , George Clooney , Christian Bale , and Ben Affleck .