The Battle of France , also known as the Fall of France , was the German invasion of France and the Low Countries during the Second World War .
In six weeks from 10 May 1940 , German forces defeated Allied forces by mobile operations and conquered France , Belgium , Luxembourg and the Netherlands , bringing land operations on the Western Front to an end until 6 June 1944 .
Italy entered the war on 10 June 1940 and attempted an invasion of France .
The German plan for the invasion consisted of two main operations .
In Fall Gelb -LRB- Case Yellow -RRB- , German armoured units pushed through the Ardennes and then along the Somme valley , cutting off and surrounding the Allied units that had advanced into Belgium , to meet the expected German invasion .
When British , Belgian and French forces were pushed back to the sea by the mobile and well-organised German operation , the British evacuated the British Expeditionary Force -LRB- BEF -RRB- and several French divisions from Dunkirk in Operation Dynamo .
After the withdrawal of the BEF , the German forces began Fall Rot -LRB- Case Red -RRB- on 5 June .
The sixty remaining French divisions made a determined resistance but were unable to overcome the German air superiority and armoured mobility .
German tanks outflanked the Maginot Line and pushed deep into France .
German forces occupied Paris unopposed on 14 June after a chaotic period of flight of the French government that led to a collapse of the French army .
German commanders met with French officials on 18 June with the goal of forcing the new French government to accept an armistice that amounted to surrender .
On 22 June , the Second Armistice at Compiègne was signed by France and Germany , which resulted in a division of France .
The neutral Vichy government led by Marshal Philippe Pétain superseded the Third Republic and Germany occupied the north and west .
Italy took control a small occupation zone in the south-east and the Vichy regime was left in control of unoccupied territory in the south known as the zone libre .
The Germans occupied the zone under Fall Anton in November 1942 , until the Allied liberation in the summer of 1944 .