`` Battle of the Bastards '' is the ninth episode of the sixth season of HBO 's fantasy television series Game of Thrones , and its 59th episode overall .
It was written by series co-creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , and directed by Miguel Sapochnik .
In the North , the armies of the eponymous bastards , Jon Snow -LRB- Kit Harington -RRB- and Ramsay Bolton -LRB- Iwan Rheon -RRB- , face off in a battle for control of Winterfell .
The Bolton army defeats most of Jon 's forces , largely composed of Wildlings .
However , Sansa Stark -LRB- Sophie Turner -RRB- arrives with Petyr Baelish -LRB- Aidan Gillen -RRB- and the Knights of the Vale and they defeat the remaining Bolton army .
Ramsay retreats to Winterfell , where Jon beats him into the mud , locks him in the kennels and Sansa feeds him to his own hounds .
In Meereen , Daenerys Targaryen -LRB- Emilia Clarke -RRB- refuses to surrender to the Masters , mounts Drogon and begins burning the Masters ' fleet ; this forces them to surrender .
Yara -LRB- Gemma Whelan -RRB- and Theon Greyjoy -LRB- Alfie Allen -RRB- arrive in Meereen and offer their ships to Daenerys , swearing to help her take the Seven Kingdoms .
`` Battle of the Bastards '' was praised as one of the series ' best episodes , with several reviewers hailing it as a `` masterpiece '' .
Critics described the battle in the North as `` terrifying , gripping and exhilarating '' and Daenerys 's reunion with her dragons at the beginning of the episode as `` thrilling '' .
Its eponymous battle took 25 days to film and required 500 extras , 600 crew members and 70 horses .
In the United States , the episode had a viewership of 7.66 million in its initial broadcast .
It earned Game of Thrones several Primetime Emmy Awards -LRB- including Outstanding Directing and Outstanding Writing -RRB- , and was Harington 's choice to support his nomination for the Outstanding Supporting Actor ; Sapochnik also won the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing in a Drama Series for the episode .