The Bee Gees
were a pop music group formed in 1958 .
Their line-up consisted of brothers Barry , Robin and Maurice Gibb .
The trio were successful for most of their decades of recording music , but they had two distinct periods of exceptional success ; as a popular music act in the late 1960s and early 1970s , and as prominent performers of the disco music era in the mid-to-late 1970s .
The group sang recognisable three-part tight harmonies ; Robin 's clear vibrato lead vocals were a hallmark of their earlier hits , while Barry 's R&B falsetto became their signature sound during the mid-to-late 1970s and 1980s .
The Bee Gees wrote all of their own hits , as well as writing and producing several major hits for other artists .
Born on the Isle of Man to English parents , the Gibb brothers lived in Chorlton , Manchester , England , until the late 1950s where they formed the Rattlesnakes .
The family then moved to Redcliffe , in Queensland , Australia , and then to Cribb Island .
After achieving their first chart success in Australia as the Bee Gees with `` Spicks and Specks '' -LRB- their 12th single -RRB- , they returned to the UK in January 1967 where producer Robert Stigwood began promoting them to a worldwide audience .
The Bee Gees have sold more than 220 million records worldwide , making them one of the world 's best-selling music artists of all time .
They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1997 ; the presenter of the award to `` Britain 's first family of harmony '' was Brian Wilson , historical leader of the Beach Boys , a `` family act '' also featuring three harmonising brothers .
The Bee Gees ' Hall of Fame citation says `` Only Elvis Presley , the Beatles , Michael Jackson , Garth Brooks and Paul McCartney have outsold the Bee Gees . ''
Following Maurice 's death in January 2003 at the age of 53 , Barry and Robin retired the group 's name after 45 years of activity .
In 2009 Robin announced that he and Barry had agreed that the Bee Gees would re-form and perform again .
Robin died in May 2012 at the age of 62 , after a prolonged struggle with cancer and other health problems , leaving Barry as the only surviving member of the group 's final line up .