Belgium -LRB- -LSB- ˈbɛldʒəm -RSB- België -LSB- ˈbɛlɣijə -RSB- ; Belgique -LSB- bɛlʒik -RSB- ; Belgien -LSB- ˈbɛlɡi̯ən -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Kingdom of Belgium , is a sovereign state in Western Europe bordered by France , the Netherlands , Germany , Luxembourg , and the North Sea .
It is a small , densely populated country which covers an area of 30528 km2 and has a population of about 11 million people .
Straddling the cultural boundary between Germanic and Latin Europe , Belgium is home to two main linguistic groups : the Dutch-speaking , mostly Flemish community , which constitutes about 59 % of the population , and the French-speaking , mostly Walloon population , which comprises 41 % of all Belgians .
Additionally , there is a small group of German-speakers who live in the East Cantons located around the High Fens area , and bordering Germany .
Historically , Belgium , the Netherlands and Luxembourg -LRB- along with parts of Northern France and Western Germany -RRB- were known as the Low Countries ; it once covered a somewhat larger area than the current Benelux group of states .
The region was called Belgica in Latin , after the Roman province of Gallia Belgica .
From the end of the Middle Ages until the 17th century , the area of Belgium was a prosperous and cosmopolitan centre of commerce and culture .
From the 16th century until the Belgian Revolution in 1830 , when Belgium seceded from the Netherlands , the area of Belgium served as the battleground between many European powers , causing it to be dubbed the `` Battlefield of Europe , ''
a reputation strengthened by both world wars .
Today , Belgium is a federal constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system of governance .
It is divided into three regions and three communities , that exist next to each other .
Its two largest regions are the Dutch-speaking region of Flanders in the north and the French-speaking southern region of Wallonia .
The Brussels-Capital Region is an officially bilingual -LRB- French and Dutch -RRB- enclave within the Flemish Region .
A German-speaking Community exists in eastern Wallonia .
Belgium 's linguistic diversity and related political conflicts are reflected in its political history and complex system of governance , made up of six different governments .
Belgium participated in the Industrial Revolution
and , during the course of the 20th century , possessed a number of colonies in Africa .
The second half of the 20th century was marked by rising tensions between the Dutch-speaking and the French-speaking citizens fueled by differences in language and culture and the unequal economic development of Flanders and Wallonia .
This continuing antagonism has led to several far-reaching reforms , resulting in a transition from a unitary to a federal arrangement during the period from 1970 to 1993 .
Despite the reforms , tensions between the groups have remained , if not increased ; there is significant separatism particularly among the Flemish ; controversial language laws exist such as the municipalities with language facilities ; and the formation of a coalition government took 18 months following the June 2010 federal election , a world record .
Belgium is one of the six founding countries of the European Union and hosts the official seats of the European Commission , Council of the European Union , and European Council , as well as a seat of the European Parliament in the country 's capital , Brussels .
Belgium is also a founding member of the Eurozone , NATO , OECD and WTO , and a part of the trilateral Benelux Union .
Its capital , Brussels , hosts several of the EU 's official seats as well as the headquarters of many major international organizations such as NATO.Belgium is a member of , or affiliated to , many international organizations , including ACCT , AfDB , AsDB , Australia Group , Benelux , BIS , CCC , CE , CERN , EAPC , EBRD , EIB , EMU , ESA , EU , FAO , G-10 , IAEA , IBRD , ICAO , ICC , ICRM , IDA , IDB , IEA , IFAD , IFC , IFRCS , IHO , ILO , IMF , IMO , IMSO , Intelsat , Interpol , IOC , IOM , ISO , ITU , MONUC -LRB- observers -RRB- , NATO , NEA , NSG , OAS -LRB- observer -RRB- , OECD , OPCW , OSCE , PCA , UN , UNCTAD , UNECE , UNESCO , UNHCR , UNIDO , UNMIK , UNMOGIP , UNRWA , UNTSO , UPU , WADB -LRB- non-regional -RRB- , WEU , WHO , WIPO , WMO , WTrO , ZC .
Belgium is also a part of the Schengen Area .
Belgium is a developed country , with an advanced high-income economy and is categorized as `` very high '' in the Human Development Index .