Benzodiazepines -LRB- BZD , BZs -RRB- , sometimes called `` benzos '' , are a class of psychoactive drugs whose core chemical structure is the fusion of a benzene ring and a diazepine ring .
The first such drug , chlordiazepoxide -LRB- Librium -RRB- , was discovered accidentally by Leo Sternbach in 1955 , and made available in 1960 by Hoffmann -- La Roche , which , since 1963 , has also marketed the benzodiazepine diazepam -LRB- Valium -RRB- .
In 1977 benzodiazepines were globally the most prescribed medications .
Benzodiazepines enhance the effect of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid -LRB- GABA -RRB- at the GABAA receptor , resulting in sedative , hypnotic -LRB- sleep-inducing -RRB- , anxiolytic -LRB- anti-anxiety -RRB- , anticonvulsant , and muscle relaxant properties .
High doses of many shorter-acting benzodiazepines may also cause anterograde amnesia and dissociation .
These properties make benzodiazepines useful in treating anxiety , insomnia , agitation , seizures , muscle spasms , alcohol withdrawal and as a premedication for medical or dental procedures .
Benzodiazepines are categorized as either short - , intermediate - , or long-acting .
Short - and intermediate-acting benzodiazepines are preferred for the treatment of insomnia ; longer-acting benzodiazepines are recommended for the treatment of anxiety .
Benzodiazepines are generally viewed as safe and effective for short-term use , although cognitive impairment and paradoxical effects such as aggression or behavioral disinhibition occasionally occur .
A minority of people can have paradoxical reactions such as worsened agitation or panic .
Long-term use is controversial because of concerns about adverse psychological and physical effects , decreasing effectiveness , and physical dependence and withdrawal .
As a result of adverse effects associated with the long-term use of benzodiazepines , withdrawal from benzodiazepines , in general , leads to improved physical and mental health .
The elderly are at an increased risk of suffering from both short - and long-term adverse effects , and as a result , all benzodiazepines are listed in the Beers List of inappropriate medications for older adults .
There is controversy concerning the safety of benzodiazepines in pregnancy .
While they are not major teratogens , uncertainty remains as to whether they cause cleft palate in a small number of babies and whether neurobehavioural effects occur as a result of prenatal exposure ; they are known to cause withdrawal symptoms in the newborn .
Benzodiazepines can be taken in overdoses and can cause dangerous deep unconsciousness .
However , they are less toxic than their predecessors , the barbiturates , and death rarely results when a benzodiazepine is the only drug taken .
When combined with other central nervous system -LRB- CNS -RRB- depressants such as alcoholic drinks and opioids , the potential for toxicity and fatal overdose increases .
Benzodiazepines are commonly misused and taken in combination with other drugs of abuse .