Bertrand Arthur William Russell , 3rd Earl Russell , -LRB- -LSB- ˈrʌsəl -RSB- 18 May 1872 -- 2 February 1970 -RRB- was a British philosopher , logician , mathematician , historian , writer , social critic , political activist and Nobel laureate .
At various points in his life he considered himself a liberal , a socialist , and a pacifist , but he also admitted that he had `` never been any of these things , in any profound sense '' .
He was born in Monmouthshire into one of the most prominent aristocratic families in the United Kingdom .
In the early 20th century , Russell led the British `` revolt against idealism '' .
He is considered one of the founders of analytic philosophy along with his predecessor Gottlob Frege , colleague G. E. Moore , and protégé Ludwig Wittgenstein .
He is widely held to be one of the 20th century 's premier logicians .
With A. N. Whitehead he wrote Principia Mathematica , an attempt to create a logical basis for mathematics .
His philosophical essay `` On Denoting '' has been considered a `` paradigm of philosophy '' .
His work has had a considerable influence on mathematics , logic , set theory , linguistics , artificial intelligence , cognitive science , computer science -LRB- see type theory and type system -RRB- , and philosophy , especially the philosophy of language , epistemology , and metaphysics .
Russell mostly was a prominent anti-war activist ; he championed anti-imperialism .
Occasionally , he advocated preventive nuclear war , before the opportunity provided by the atomic monopoly had passed , and `` welcomed with enthusiasm '' world government .
He went to prison for his pacifism during World War I. Later , he campaigned against Adolf Hitler , then criticised Stalinist totalitarianism , attacked the involvement of the United States in the Vietnam War , and was an outspoken proponent of nuclear disarmament .
In 1950 Russell was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature `` in recognition of his varied and significant writings in which he champions humanitarian ideals and freedom of thought '' .