Bhagat Singh -LRB- -LSB- pə̀ɡət̪ sɪ́ŋɡ -RSB- -- 23 March 1931 -RRB- was a charismatic Indian socialist revolutionary whose two acts of dramatic violence against the British in India and execution at age 23 made him a folk hero of the Indian independence movement .
In December 1928 , Bhagat Singh and an associate , Shivaram Rajguru , fatally shot a 21-year-old British police officer , John Saunders , in Lahore , British India , mistaking Saunders , who was still on probation , for the British police superintendent , James Scott , whom they had intended to assassinate .
They believed Scott was responsible for the death of popular Indian nationalist leader Lala Lajpat Rai , by having ordered a lathi charge in which Rai was injured , and , two weeks after which , died of a heart attack .
Saunders was felled by a single shot from Rajguru , a marksman .
He was then shot several times by Singh , the postmortem report showing eight bullet wounds .
Another associate of Singh , Chandra Shekhar Azad , shot dead an Indian police constable , Chanan Singh , who attempted to pursue Singh and Rajguru as they fled .
After escaping , Singh and his associates , using pseudonyms , publicly owned to avenging Lajpat Rai 's death , putting up prepared posters , which , however , they had altered to show Saunders as their intended target .
Singh was thereafter on the run for many months , and no convictions resulted at the time .
Surfacing again in April 1929 , he and another associate , Batukeshwar Dutt , exploded two improvised bombs inside the Central Legislative Assembly in Delhi .
They showered leaflets from the gallery on the legislators below , shouted slogans , and then allowed the authorities to arrest them .
The arrest , and the resulting publicity , had the effect of bringing to light Singh 's complicity in the John Saunders case .
Awaiting trial , Singh gained much public sympathy after he joined fellow defendant Jatin Das in a hunger strike , demanding better prison conditions for Indian prisoners , and ending in Das 's death from starvation in September 1929 .
Singh was convicted and hanged in March 1931 , aged 23 .
Bhagat Singh became a popular folk hero after his death .
Jawaharlal Nehru wrote about him , `` Bhagat Singh did not become popular because of his act of terrorism but because he seemed to vindicate , for the moment , the honour of Lala Lajpat Rai , and through him of the nation .
He became a symbol ; the act was forgotten , the symbol remained , and within a few months each town and village of the Punjab , and to a lesser extent in the rest of northern India , resounded with his name . ''
In still later years , Singh , an atheist and socialist in life , won admirers in India from among a political spectrum that included both Communists and right-wing Hindu nationalists .
Although many of Singh 's associates , as well as many Indian anti-colonial revolutionaries , were also involved in daring acts , and were either executed or died violent deaths , few came to be lionized in popular art and literature to the same extent as Singh .