William Sanford Nye -LRB- born November 27 , 1955 -RRB- , popularly known as Bill Nye the Science Guy , is an American science communicator , television presenter , and mechanical engineer .
He is best known as the host of the PBS children 's science show Bill Nye the Science Guy -LRB- 1993 -- 1998 -RRB- , and for his many subsequent appearances in popular media as a science educator .
Nye began his career as a mechanical engineer for Boeing Corporation in Seattle , where he invented a hydraulic resonance suppressor tube used on 747 airplanes .
In 1986 , Nye left Boeing to pursue comedy , writing and performing jokes and bits for the local sketch television show Almost Live !
, where he would regularly conduct wacky science experiments .
Nye aspired to become the next Mr. Wizard and with the help of several producers successfully pitched the children 's television program Bill Nye the Science Guy to KCTS-TV , channel 9 , Seattle 's public television station .
The show -- which proudly proclaimed in its theme song that `` science rules ! ''
-- ran from 1994 to 1999 in national TV syndication .
Known for its `` high-energy presentation and MTV-paced segments , '' the program became a hit for both kids and adults .
The show was critically acclaimed and was nominated for 23 Emmy Awards , winning nineteen .
Following the success of his show , Nye continued to advocate for science , becoming the CEO of The Planetary Society and helping develop sundials for the Mars Exploration Rover missions .
Nye has written multiple best-selling books on science , including Undeniable : Evolution and the Science of Creation in 2014 and Unstoppable : Harnessing Science to Change the World in 2015 .
Nye has made frequent media appearances , including on Dancing with the Stars , The Big Bang Theory and Inside Amy Schumer .
Nye starred in a documentary about his life and science advocacy titled Bill Nye : Science Guy , which premiered at the South by Southwest Film Festival in March 2017 .
In 2017 , he debuted a Netflix series , entitled Bill Nye Saves the World .