Black Canary is a fictional superheroine in comic books published by DC Comics .
Created by the writer-artist team of Robert Kanigher and Carmine Infantino , the character debuted in Flash Comics # 86 -LRB- August 1947 -RRB- .
One of DC 's earliest super-heroines , Black Canary has appeared in many of the company 's flagship team-up titles including Justice Society of America and Justice League of America .
Since the late 1960s , the character has been paired with archer superhero The Green Arrow professionally and romantically .
At her Golden Age debut , Black Canary was the alter ego of Dinah Drake and participated in crime-fighting adventures with her love interest -LRB- and eventual husband -RRB- , Gotham City detective Larry Lance .
Initially , the character was a hand-to-hand fighter without superpowers who often posed as a criminal to infiltrate criminal gangs .
Later stories depicted her as a world-class martial artist with a superpower : the `` Canary Cry '' , a high-powered sonic scream which could shatter objects and incapacitate enemies even known to be able to kill Kryptonians such as Superman .
When DC Comics adjusted its continuity , Black Canary was established as two separate entities : mother and daughter , Dinah Drake and Dinah Laurel Lance .
Stories since the Silver Age have focused on the younger Black Canary , ascribing her superhuman abilities to a genetic mutation she uses as well as her amazing training in martial arts .
Black Canary has been adapted into various media , including direct-to-video animated films , video games , and both live-action and animated television series , featuring as a main or recurring character in the shows Birds of Prey , Justice League Unlimited , Smallville , Batman : The Brave and the Bold , Young Justice and Arrow .
The character is ranked the 71st-greatest comic book character of all time by Wizard , and IGN rated her its 81st-greatest all-time comic book hero .
She was number 26 on Comics Buyer 's Guide 's `` 100 Sexiest Women in Comics '' list .