In basketball , a block or blocked shot occurs when a defensive player legally deflects a field goal attempt from an offensive player .
The defender is not allowed to make contact with the offensive player 's hand -LRB- unless the defender is also in contact with the ball -RRB- or a foul is called .
In order to be legal , the block must occur while the shot is traveling upward or at its apex .
A deflected field goal that is made does not count as a blocked shot and simply counts as a successful field goal attempt for shooter plus the points awarded to the shooting team .
Every successful blocked shot is counted as a missed field goal attempt for the shooter .
Also , on a shooting foul , a blocked shot can not be awarded or counted , even if the player who deflected the field goal attempt is different from the player who committed the foul .
If the ball is heading downward when the defender hits it , it is ruled as goaltending and counts as a made basket .
Goaltending is also called if the block is made after the ball bounces on the backboard -LRB- NFHS excepted ; the NCAA also used this rule until the 2009 -- 10 season -RRB- .
Nicknames for blocked shots include `` rejections , '' `` stuffs , '' `` bushed '' , `` fudged '' , or notably `` double-fudged '' -LRB- two-handed blocks -RRB- , `` facials , '' `` swats , '' `` denials , '' and `` packs . ''
Blocked shots were first officially recorded in the NBA during the 1973 -- 74 season .
Largely due to their height and position near the basket , centers and power forwards tend to record the most blocks , but shorter players with good jumping ability can also be blockers , an example being Dwyane Wade , the shortest player , at 6 ' 4 '' , to record 100 blocked shots in a single season .
A player with the ability to block shots can be a positive asset to a team 's defense , as they can make it difficult for opposing players to shoot near the basket and by keeping the basketball in play , as opposed to swatting it out of bounds , a blocked shot can lead to a fast break , a skill Bill Russell was notable for .
To be a good shot-blocker , a player needs great court sense and timing , and good height or jumping ability .
One tactic is that a shot-blocker can intimidate opponents to alter their shots , resulting in a miss .