Bob Dylan -LRB- -LSB- ˈdɪlən -RSB- born Robert Allen Zimmerman ; May 24 , 1941 -RRB- is an American poetic songwriter , singer , painter , writer , and Nobel prize laureate .
He has been influential in popular music and culture for more than five decades .
Much of his most celebrated work dates from the 1960s , when his songs chronicled social unrest .
Early songs such as `` Blowin ' in the Wind '' and `` The Times They Are a-Changin ' '' became anthems for the Civil Rights Movement and anti-war movement .
Leaving behind his initial base in the American folk music revival , his six-minute single `` Like a Rolling Stone '' , recorded in 1965 , enlarged the range of popular music .
Dylan 's lyrics incorporate a wide range of political , social , philosophical , and literary influences .
They defied existing pop music conventions and appealed to the burgeoning counterculture .
Initially inspired by the performances of Little Richard and the songwriting of Woody Guthrie , Robert Johnson , and Hank Williams , Dylan has amplified and personalized musical genres .
His recording career , spanning more than 50 years , has explored the traditions in American song -- from folk , blues , and country to gospel , rock and roll , and rockabilly to English , Scottish , and Irish folk music , embracing even jazz and the Great American Songbook .
Dylan performs with guitar , keyboards , and harmonica .
Backed by a changing lineup of musicians , he has toured steadily since the late 1980s on what has been dubbed the Never Ending Tour .
His accomplishments as a recording artist and performer have been central to his career , but his songwriting is considered his greatest contribution .
Since 1994 , Dylan has published seven books of drawings and paintings , and his work has been exhibited in major art galleries .
As a musician , Dylan has sold more than 100 million records , making him one of the best-selling artists of all time .
He has also received numerous awards including eleven Grammy Awards , a Golden Globe Award , and an Academy Award .
Dylan has been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , Minnesota Music Hall of Fame , Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame , and Songwriters Hall of Fame .
The Pulitzer Prize jury in 2008 awarded him a special citation for `` his profound impact on popular music and American culture , marked by lyrical compositions of extraordinary poetic power . ''
In May 2012 , Dylan received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama .
In 2016 , he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature `` for having created new poetic expressions within the great American song tradition '' .