The bonobo -LRB- -LSB- bə.ˈnoʊ.boʊ -RSB- or -LSB- ˈbɒ.nə.boʊ -RSB- Pan paniscus -RRB- , formerly called the pygmy chimpanzee and less often , the dwarf or gracile chimpanzee , is an endangered great ape and one of the two species making up the genus Pan ; the other is Pan troglodytes , or the common chimpanzee .
Although the name `` chimpanzee '' is sometimes used to refer to both species together , it is usually understood as referring to the common chimpanzee , whereas Pan paniscus is usually referred to as the bonobo .
The bonobo is distinguished by relatively long legs , pink lips , dark face and tail-tuft through adulthood , and parted long hair on its head .
The bonobo is found in a 500000 km2 area of the Congo Basin in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Central Africa .
The species is omnivorous and inhabits primary and secondary forests , including seasonally inundated swamp forests .
Political instability in the region and the timidity of bonobos has meant there has been relatively little field work done observing the species in its natural habitat .
Along with the common chimpanzee , the bonobo is the closest extant relative to humans .
Because the two species are not proficient swimmers , the formation of the Congo River 1.5 -- 2 million years ago possibly led to the speciation of the bonobo .
Bonobos live south of the river , and thereby were separated from the ancestors of the common chimpanzee , which live north of the river .
There is no concrete data on population numbers , but the estimate is between 29,500 and 50,000 individuals .
The species is listed as Endangered on the IUCN Red List and is threatened by habitat destruction and human population growth and movement , though commercial poaching is the most prominent threat .
They typically live 40 years in captivity ; their lifespan in the wild is unknown .
As of June 2016 a total of 119 live in zoos across Europe ; 65 distributed between six different German zoos , and a further 54 in zoos in Belgium , France , the Netherlands and England .