Boston -LRB- pronounced -LSB- ˈbɒstən -RSB- -RRB- is the capital and most populous city of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in the United States .
Boston is also the seat of Suffolk County , although the county government was disbanded on July 1 , 1999 .
The city proper covers 48 mi2 with an estimated population of 667,137 in 2015 , making it the largest city in New England and the 23rd most populous city in the United States .
The city is the economic and cultural anchor of a substantially larger metropolitan area known as Greater Boston , a Metropolitan Statistical Area -LRB- MSA -RRB- home to a census-estimated 4.7 million people in 2014 and ranking as the tenth-largest such area in the country .
Alternately , as a Combined Statistical Area -LRB- CSA -RRB- , this wider commuting region is home to some 8.1 million people , making it the sixth-largest as such in the United States .
One of the oldest cities in the United States , Boston was founded on the Shawmut Peninsula in 1630 by Puritan settlers from England .
It was the scene of several key events of the American Revolution , such as the Boston Massacre , the Boston Tea Party , the Battle of Bunker Hill , and the Siege of Boston .
Upon U.S. independence from Great Britain , it continued to be an important port and manufacturing hub as well as a center for education and culture .
Through land reclamation and municipal annexation , Boston has expanded beyond the original peninsula .
Its rich history attracts many tourists , with Faneuil Hall alone drawing over 20 million visitors per year .
Boston 's many firsts include the United States ' first public school , Boston Latin School -LRB- 1635 -RRB- , first subway system , the Tremont Street Subway -LRB- 1897 -RRB- , and first public park , Boston Common -LRB- 1634 -RRB- .
The area 's many colleges and universities make Boston an international center of higher education , including law , medicine , engineering , and business , and the city is considered to be a world leader in innovation and entrepreneurship , with nearly 2,000 startups .
Boston 's economic base also includes finance , professional and business services , biotechnology , information technology , and government activities .
Households in the city claim the highest average rate of philanthropy in the United States ; businesses and institutions rank among the top in the country for environmental sustainability and investment .
The city has one of the highest costs of living in the United States as it has undergone gentrification , though it remains high on world livability rankings .