Boyz II Men is an American R&B vocal group from Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , best known for emotional ballads and acappella harmonies .
Formerly a quartet including bass Michael McCary , they are currently a trio composed of baritone Nathan Morris alongside tenors Wanya Morris and Shawn Stockman .
During the 1990s , Boyz II Men found fame on Motown Records as a quartet .
McCary left the group in 2003 due to health issues and contractual agreements .
During the 1990s , Boyz II Men gained international success .
This began with the release of the number one single `` End of the Road '' in 1992 , which reached the top of charts worldwide .
`` End of the Road '' would set a new record for longevity , staying at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 for thirteen weeks , breaking the decades-old record held by Elvis Presley .
Boyz II Men proceeded to break this record with the subsequent releases of `` I 'll Make Love to You '' and `` One Sweet Day '' -LRB- with Mariah Carey -RRB- , which , at fourteen and sixteen weeks respectively , each set new records for the total number of weeks at number one .
`` I 'll Make Love to You '' also topped the charts in Australia -LRB- for four weeks -RRB- and garnered international success .
As of 2016 , `` One Sweet Day '' still holds the all-time record with sixteen weeks at the top of the Hot 100 .
Consequently , Boyz II Men are top ranking members with regard to time spent at number one in Billboard history , ranking in the fourth spot with 50 weeks -LRB- as of 2014 -RRB- .
Furthermore , when `` On Bended Knee '' took the number one spot away from `` I 'll Make Love to You '' , Boyz II Men became only the third artists ever -LRB- after The Beatles and Presley -RRB- to replace themselves at the top of the Billboard Hot 100 .
Boyz II Men are among a select group of artists that have held at the number-one spot for at least 50 weeks cumulatively , placing them just fourth on that list behind Elvis Presley , The Beatles , and Mariah Carey .
These achievements were enough to earn Boyz II Men recognition as Billboard magazine 's fourth most successful musical group of the 1990s .
Boyz II Men continue to perform worldwide , as a trio .
Their most recent studio album , Collide , was released in 2014 .