Breaking Bad is an American crime drama television series created and produced by Vince Gilligan .
The show originally aired on the AMC network for five seasons , from January 20 , 2008 , to September 29 , 2013 .
It tells the story of Walter White -LRB- Bryan Cranston -RRB- , a struggling high school chemistry teacher diagnosed with inoperable lung cancer .
Together with his former student Jesse Pinkman -LRB- Aaron Paul -RRB- , White turns to a life of crime , producing and selling crystallized methamphetamine to secure his family 's financial future before he dies , while navigating the dangers of the criminal world .
The title is from a Southern colloquialism meaning to `` raise hell '' .
Breaking Bad is set and was filmed in Albuquerque , New Mexico .
Walter 's family consists of his wife Skyler -LRB- Anna Gunn -RRB- and children , Walter , Jr. -LRB- RJ Mitte -RRB- and Holly -LRB- Elanor Anne Wenrich -RRB- .
The show also features Skyler 's sister Marie Schrader -LRB- Betsy Brandt -RRB- , and her husband Hank -LRB- Dean Norris -RRB- , a Drug Enforcement Administration -LRB- DEA -RRB- agent .
Walter hires lawyer Saul Goodman -LRB- Bob Odenkirk -RRB- , who connects him with private investigator and fixer Mike Ehrmantraut -LRB- Jonathan Banks -RRB- and in turn Mike 's employer , drug kingpin Gus Fring -LRB- Giancarlo Esposito -RRB- .
The final season introduces the characters Todd Alquist -LRB- Jesse Plemons -RRB- and Lydia Rodarte-Quayle -LRB- Laura Fraser -RRB- .
Breaking Bad is widely regarded as one of the greatest television series of all time .
By the time the series finale aired , the series was among the most-watched cable shows on American television .
The show received numerous awards , including sixteen Primetime Emmy Awards , eight Satellite Awards , two Golden Globe Awards , two Peabody Awards , two Critics ' Choice Awards , and four Television Critics Association Awards .
For his leading performance , Cranston won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series four times , while Aaron Paul won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series three times ; Anna Gunn won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series twice .
In 2013 , Breaking Bad entered the Guinness World Records as the most critically acclaimed show of all time .