British Columbia -LRB- BC -RRB- is the westernmost province of Canada , with a population of more than four million people located between the Pacific Ocean and the Rocky Mountains .
British Columbia is also a component of the Pacific Northwest and the Cascadia bioregion , along with the U.S. states of Idaho , Oregon , Washington , Alaska , and western Montana .
The first British settlement in the area was Fort Victoria , established in 1843 , which gave rise to the city of Victoria , at first the capital of the separate Colony of Vancouver Island .
Subsequently , on the mainland , the Colony of British Columbia -LRB- 1858 -- 66 -RRB- was founded by Richard Clement Moody and the Royal Engineers , Columbia Detachment , in response to the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush .
Moody was Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works for the Colony and the first Lieutenant-Governor of British Columbia : he was hand-picked by the Colonial Office in London to transform British Columbia into the British Empire 's `` bulwark in the farthest west '' , and `` to found a second England on the shores of the Pacific '' .
Moody selected the site for and founded the original capital of British Columbia , New Westminster , established the Cariboo Road and Stanley Park , and designed the first version of the Coat of arms of British Columbia .
Port Moody is named after him .
In 1866 , Vancouver Island became part of the colony of British Columbia , and Victoria became the united colony 's capital .
In 1871 , British Columbia became the sixth province of Canada .
Its Latin motto is Splendor sine occasu -LRB- `` Splendour without Diminishment '' -RRB- .
The capital of British Columbia remains Victoria , the fifteenth-largest metropolitan region in Canada , named for the Queen who created the original European colonies .
The largest city is Vancouver , the third-largest metropolitan area in Canada , the largest in Western Canada , and the third-largest in the Pacific Northwest .
In October 2013 , British Columbia had an estimated population of 4,606,371 -LRB- about 2.5 million of whom were in Greater Vancouver -RRB- .
The province is currently governed by the BC Liberal Party , led by Premier Christy Clark , who became leader as a result of a leadership convention vote on February 26 , 2011 , and who led her party to an election victory on May 14 , 2013 .
British Columbia evolved from British possessions that were established in what is now British Columbia by 1871 .
First Nations , the original inhabitants of the land , have a history of at least 10,000 years in the area .
Today there are few treaties and the question of Aboriginal Title , long ignored , has become a legal and political question of frequent debate as a result of recent court actions .
Notably , the Tsilhqot ` in Nation has established Aboriginal title to a portion of their territory , as a result of the recent Supreme Court of Canada decision -LRB- William -LSB- Tsilhqot ` in Nation -RSB- v. British Columbia -RRB- .
BC 's economy is diverse , with service producing industries accounting for the largest portion of the province 's GDP .
It is the endpoint of transcontinental railways , and the site of major Pacific ports that enable international trade .
Though less than 5 % of its vast 944735 km2 land is arable , the province is agriculturally rich -LRB- particularly in the Fraser and Okanagan valleys -RRB- , because of milder weather near the coast and in certain sheltered southern valleys .
Its climate encourages outdoor recreation and tourism , though its economic mainstay has long been resource extraction , principally logging , farming , and mining .
Vancouver , the province 's largest city and metropolitan area , also serves as the headquarters of many western-based natural resource companies .
It also benefits from a strong housing market and a per capita income well above the national average .
While the coast of British Columbia and certain valleys in the south-central part of the province have mild weather , the majority of its land mass experiences a cold-winter-temperate climate similar to that of the rest of Canada .
The Northern Interior region has a subarctic climate with very cold winters .
The climate of Vancouver is by far the mildest winter climate of the major Canadian cities , with nighttime January temperatures averaging above the freezing point .