Britney Jean Spears -LRB- born December 2 , 1981 -RRB- is an American singer , dancer , and actress .
Born in McComb , Mississippi , and raised in Kentwood , Louisiana , she performed acting roles in stage productions and television shows as a child before signing with Jive Records in 1997 .
Spears 's first and second studio albums , ... Baby One More Time -LRB- 1999 -RRB- and Oops !
... I Did It Again -LRB- 2000 -RRB- , became international successes , with the former becoming the best-selling album by a teenage solo artist .
Title tracks '' ... Baby One More Time '' and `` Oops !
... I Did It Again '' broke international sales records .
In 2001 , Spears released her self-titled third studio album , Britney , and played the starring role in the film Crossroads -LRB- 2002 -RRB- .
She assumed creative control of her fourth studio album , In the Zone -LRB- 2003 -RRB- , which yielded the worldwide success of the single `` Toxic '' .
In 2007 , Spears 's much-publicized personal issues sent her career into hiatus .
Her fifth studio album , Blackout , was released later that year , and spawned singles such as `` Gim me More '' and `` Piece of Me '' .
Her erratic behavior and hospitalizations continued through the following year , at which point she was placed under a still ongoing conservatorship .
Spears 's sixth studio album , Circus -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , included the international chart-topping single `` Womanizer '' .
Her seventh studio album , Femme Fatale -LRB- 2011 -RRB- , became her first to yield three top-ten singles in the United States .
She released her eighth studio album Britney Jean in 2013 .
Later that year , Spears began the four-year residency show , Britney : Piece of Me , at The AXIS at Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino in Las Vegas .
In 2016 , Spears released her ninth studio album , Glory .
In 2017 , she announced that her residency show would develop into a world tour , Britney : Live in Concert .
Spears is regarded as a pop icon and credited with influencing the revival of teen pop during the late 1990s .
She became the best-selling teenage artist of all time and garnered honorific titles including the `` Princess of Pop '' .
Her work has earned her numerous awards and accolades , including a Grammy Award , six MTV Video Music Awards including the Lifetime Achievement Award , seven Billboard Music Awards including the Millennium Award and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame .
In 2009 , Billboard ranked her as the 8th overall Artist of the Decade , and also recognized her as the best-selling female artist of the 2000s , as well as the fifth overall .
The Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- lists Spears as the eighth top-selling female artist in the United States , with 34 million certified albums .
She has sold over 100 million records worldwide making her one of the best-selling music artists of all time .
According to Billboard Spears has sold about 22.38 million singles in digital downloads in US and is the fourth best-selling female artist since Nielsen SoundScan began .
Rolling Stone recognized her instant success as one of the Top 25 Teen Idol Breakout Moments of all time , while VH1 ranked her eleventh on their `` 100 Greatest Women in Music '' list in 2012 , and Billboard named her the sexiest woman in music .
Forbes reported that Spears was the highest paid female musician of 2012 , with earnings of $ 58 million , having last topped the list in 2002 .