Brown University is a private Ivy League research university in Providence , Rhode Island , United States , founded in 1764 as `` The College in the English Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations . ''
Brown is the seventh-oldest institution of higher education in the United States and one of the nine Colonial Colleges established before the American Revolution .
At its foundation , Brown was the first college in the United States to accept students regardless of their religious affiliation .
Its engineering program was established in 1847 and was the first in the Ivy League .
It was one of the early doctoral-granting U.S. institutions in the late 19th century , adding master and doctoral studies in 1887 .
Brown 's New Curriculum is sometimes referred to in education theory as the Brown Curriculum and was adopted by faculty vote in 1969 after a period of student lobbying .
The New Curriculum eliminated mandatory `` general education '' distribution requirements , made students `` the architects of their own syllabus , '' and allowed them to take any course for a grade of satisfactory or unrecorded no-credit .
In 1971 , Brown 's coordinate women 's institution Pembroke College was fully merged into the university .
Pembroke Campus now operates as a place for dorms and classrooms .
Undergraduate admissions is very selective , with an acceptance rate of 8.3 percent for the class of 2021 , according to the university .
The University comprises The College , the Graduate School , Alpert Medical School , the School of Engineering , the School of Public Health , and the School of Professional Studies -LRB- which includes the IE Brown Executive MBA program -RRB- .
Brown 's international programs are organized through the Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs , and the university is academically affiliated with the Marine Biological Laboratory and the Rhode Island School of Design .
The Brown/RISD Dual Degree Program , offered in conjunction with the Rhode Island School of Design , is a five-year course that awards degrees from both institutions .
Brown 's main campus is located in the College Hill Historic District in the city of Providence , the third largest city in New England .
The University 's neighborhood is a federally listed architectural district with a dense concentration of Colonial-era buildings .
On the western edge of the campus , Benefit Street contains `` one of the finest cohesive collections of restored seventeenth - and eighteenth-century architecture in the United States '' .
Brown 's faculty and alumni include eight Nobel Prize laureates , five National Humanities Medalists , and ten National Medal of Science laureates .
Other notable alumni include eight billionaire graduates , a U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice , four U.S. Secretaries of State and other Cabinet officials , 54 members of the United States Congress , 55 Rhodes Scholars , 48 Marshall Scholars , 14 MacArthur Genius Fellows , 19 Pulitzer Prize winners , members of royal families , as well as leaders and founders of major companies .