Peter Gene Hernandez -LRB- born October 8 , 1985 -RRB- , known professionally as Bruno Mars -LRB- -LSB- ˈmɑrz -RSB- -RRB- , is an American singer-songwriter , multi-instrumentalist , record producer , and choreographer .
Born and raised in Honolulu , Hawaii , by a family of musicians , Mars began making music at a young age and performed in various musical venues in his hometown throughout his childhood .
He graduated from high school and moved to Los Angeles to pursue a musical career .
After being dropped by Motown Records , Mars signed a recording contract with Atlantic Records in 2009 .
In 2009 , he co-founded the production team The Smeezingtons , responsible for the singles `` Nothin ' on You '' by B.o.B and `` Billionaire '' by Travie McCoy .
He featured on the hooks for both singles , becoming recognized as a solo artist .
His debut studio album Doo-Wops & Hooligans -LRB- 2010 -RRB- included the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart-topping singles `` Just the Way You Are '' and `` Grenade '' , as well as the number-four single `` The Lazy Song '' .
His second album , Unorthodox Jukebox -LRB- 2012 -RRB- , peaked at number one in the United States .
The album spawned the international singles `` Locked Out of Heaven '' , `` When I Was Your Man '' and `` Treasure '' .
In 2014 , Mars lent his vocals to Mark Ronson 's `` Uptown Funk '' .
In 2016 , he released his third studio album 24K Magic with the lead single of the same title released on October 7 , 2016 .
To date , he has sold over 115 million singles and 9 million albums worldwide , making him one of the best-selling artists of all time .
Mars has landed seven number-one singles on the Billboard Hot 100 since his career launched in 2010 , attaining his first five faster than any male artist since Elvis Presley .
Mars has received many awards and nominations , including five Grammy Awards , and was named one of Times 100 most influential people in the world in 2011 .
In December 2013 , he ranked number one on the Forbes 30 under 30 list .
Mars is known for his stage performances and retro showmanship .
He is accompanied by his band , The Hooligans , who play a variety of instruments such as electric guitar , bass , piano , keyboards , drums and horns , and also serve as backup singers and dancers .
Mars performs in a wide range of musical styles .