BTS , also known as Bangtan Boys , is a seven-member South Korean boy band formed by Big Hit Entertainment .
Their name in Korean - Bangtan Sonyeondan , and Japanese - , both translate to `` Bulletproof Boy Scouts '' .
They debuted on June 13 , 2013 , with the song `` No More Dream '' from their first album called 2 Cool 4 Skool , for which they won several `` New Artist of the Year '' awards including those at the 2013 MelOn Music Awards and Golden Disk Awards , and the 2014 Seoul Music Awards .
A year after their debut , they received major bonsang awards for their subsequent albums Dark & Wild and The Most Beautiful Moment in Life , Part 1 .
BTS continued rising to widespread prominence with their The Most Beautiful Moment in Life trilogy , with The Most Beautiful Moment in Life , Part 2 and The Most Beautiful Moment In Life : Young Forever both debuting inside the Billboard 200 .
The Most Beautiful Moment In Life , Part 2 also charted at number one on the Billboard World Albums Chart and remained there for multiple weeks , making BTS the first K-pop act to achieve that feat .
The Most Beautiful Moment in Life : Young Forever went on to win the coveted `` Album of the Year '' award at the 2016 Melon Music Awards .
This win marked BTS 's first daesang , or `` grand prize '' , since their debut .
The group released their second full album , Wings in 2016 .
The album debuted at # 26 on the US Billboard 200 , which marked the highest chart ranking for a K-pop album ever , as well as made BTS the first K-pop act to log three entries onto the chart , and the first to spend more than one week on the chart .
In their native South Korea , Wings sold 681,924 albums in its first month , breaking the record for the highest first month sale for an album in Gaon history , as well as becoming the best selling album in Gaon history thus far .
The album 's title track , `` Blood Sweat & Tears '' -LRB- Korean : 피 땀 눈물 -RRB- , became the group 's first domestic number one hit on the Gaon Digital Chart .
The group 's follow up comeback and follow up title song , ` Spring Day ' -LRB- Korean : 봄날 -RRB- also reached number one on Gaon Digital Chart , and its corresponding album ` You Never Walk Alone ' recorded over 700,000 in pre-orders alone .
Wings went on to sell more than 1.5 million copies , making it BTS 's first `` million seller '' .
To date , BTS 's discography has sold an estimated 4 million albums worldwide .
Known for their large social media presence , BTS were listed by Forbes as the most retweeted artist on Twitter in March 2016 .
Following that , Twitter launched its first ever K-pop Twitter emoji featuring BTS .
In October 2016 , Billboard placed BTS as # 1 on their Social 50 chart , making them the first Korean group to top the chart .
To date , they have spent 27 weeks as # 1 on the Social 50 chart .
In 2017 , BTS won a Billboard Music Award for ` Top Social Artist ' .
Also known for their large international fanbase , having performed and sold out tours in Asia , Europe , Australia , North America and South America , BTS 's performances won them the Best World Performer award in the 2015 Mnet Asian Music Awards .
Just a year later , BTS went on to win the 2016 Mnet Asian Music Award for Artist of the Year .
In 2017 , BTS ranked # 5 on Forbes Korea Power Celebrity list , a list ranking Korea 's most powerful and influential celebrities .