The Burj Khalifa -LRB- برج خليفة , Arabic for `` Khalifa Tower '' ; pronounced -LSB- langˈbɝdʒ_kə ` li : fə -RSB- -RRB- , known as the Burj Dubai before its inauguration , is a megatall skyscraper in Dubai , United Arab Emirates .
With a total height of 829.8 m including the antenna and a roof height of 828 m , the Burj Khalifa is currently the tallest structure in the world since topping out in late 2008 .
Construction of the Burj Khalifa began in 2004 , with the exterior completed 5 years later in 2009 .
The primary structure is reinforced concrete .
The building was opened in 2010 as part of a new development called Downtown Dubai .
It is designed to be the centrepiece of large-scale , mixed-use development .
The decision to construct the building is reportedly based on the government 's decision to diversify from an oil-based economy , and for Dubai to gain international recognition .
The building was named in honour of the ruler of Abu Dhabi and president of the United Arab Emirates , Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan ; Abu Dhabi and the UAE government lent Dubai money to pay its debts .
The building broke numerous height records , including its designation as the tallest tower in the world .
Burj Khalifa was designed by Adrian Smith , then of Skidmore , Owings & Merrill -LRB- SOM -RRB- , whose firm designed the Willis Tower and One World Trade Center .
Hyder Consulting was chosen to be the supervising engineer with NORR Group Consultants International Limited chosen to supervise the architecture of the project .
The design is derived from the Islamic architecture of the region , such as in the Great Mosque of Samarra .
The Y-shaped tripartite floor geometry is designed to optimize residential and hotel space .
A buttressed central core and wings are used to support the height of the building .
Although this design was derived from Tower Palace III , the Burj Khalifa 's central core houses all vertical transportation with the exception of egress stairs within each of the wings .
The structure also features a cladding system which is designed to withstand Dubai 's hot summer temperatures .
It contains a total of 57 elevators and 8 escalators .
Critical reception to Burj Khalifa has been generally positive , and the building has received many awards .
However , the labour issues during construction were controversial , since the building was built primarily by migrant workers from South Asia with several allegations of mistreatment .
Poor working conditions are common , as the result of the lack of minimum wage laws in the United Arab Emirates .
Several instances of suicides have been reported , which is not uncommon for migrant construction workers in Dubai despite safety precautions in place .