Camden is a city in Camden County , New Jersey .
Camden is located directly across the Delaware River from Philadelphia , Pennsylvania .
At the 2010 United States Census , the city had a population of 77,344 .
-LSB- 10 -RSB- -LSB- 12 -RSB- -LSB- 13 -RSB- Camden is the 12th most populous municipality in New Jersey .
The city was incorporated on February 13 , 1828 .
On March 13 , 1844 , Camden became a county seat in New Jersey .
-LSB- 25 -RSB- The city derives its name from Charles Pratt , 1st Earl Camden .
-LSB- 26 -RSB- -LSB- 27 -RSB- Camden is made up of over twenty different neighborhoods .
By the end of the nineteenth century Camden began to industrialize with the foundation of the Campbell Soup Company by Joseph Campbell .
Other companies such as the New York Shipbuilding Corporation and the Victor Talking Machine Company opened their operations and helped Camden move into an industrial economy .
At the beginning of the twentieth century Camden 's population consisted mostly of European immigrants .
German , British , and Irish immigrants , as well as African Americans from the south made up the majority of the city in the mid nineteenth century .
Around the turn of the twentieth century Italian and Eastern European immigrants had become the majority of the population .
The city was consistently prosperous throughout the Great Depression and World War II .
After World War II Camden manufacturers began closing their factories and moving out of the city .
Camden 's cultural history has been greatly affected by both its economic and social position over the years .
With the loss of manufacturing jobs came a sharp decline in population numbers .
Suburbanization also had an effect on the drop in population .
Civil unrest and crime became common in Camden with the decline in population .
In 1971 , civil unrest reached its peak with riots breaking out in response to the death of Horacio Jimenez , a Puerto Rican motorist who was killed by two white police officers .
Camden 's industrial and post-industrial history gave rise to distinct neighborhoods and cultural groups that have affected the status of the city over the course of the 20th century .
Over the years Camden has made many attempts to restore its economic stature .
In the 1980s Mayor Randy Primas campaigned for the city to adopt two different nuisance industries : a prison and a trash-to-steam incinerator .
Despite opposition from Camden residents , the Riverfront State Prison was opened in 1985 and the trash-to-steam plant opened in 1989 .
With the addition of the trash-to-steam plant Camden has faced numerous air and water pollution issues .
Camden is also the home of a waste-water treatment facility .
In the 1970s , dangerous pollutants were found in the wells from which many Camden citizens received their household water .
These pollutants decreased property values in Camden and caused health problems among the city 's residents .
Pollution is an ongoing issue that local nonprofits are trying to solve .
Camden is home to hospitals , schools , and attractions .
The Camden waterfront holds four tourist attractions , the USS New Jersey ; the BB&T Pavilion ; Campbell 's Field ; and the Adventure Aquarium .
Until recently Campbell 's field was home to the Camden Riversharks .
The city is the home of Rutgers University -- Camden , which was founded as the South Jersey Law School in 1926 , and Cooper Medical School of Rowan University , which opened in 2012 .
Camden also houses both Cooper University Hospital and Our Lady of Lourdes Medical Center .
The `` eds and meds '' institutions account for roughly 45 % of Camden 's total employment .
Forty percent of Camden residents are living below the national poverty line .
-LSB- 33 -RSB- Camden had the highest crime rate in the United States in 2012 , with 2,566 violent crimes for every 100,000 people , -LSB- 34 -RSB- 6.6 times higher than the national average of 387 violent crimes per 100,000 citizens .
-LSB- 35 -RSB-
Camden has historically been a stronghold of the Democratic Party .
Voter turnout is very low ; approximately 50 % of Camden 's registered voters participated in the 2016 General Election .
Three of Camden 's mayors have been jailed for corruption , the most recent being Milton Milan in 2000 .
-LSB- 28 -RSB- From 2005 to 2012 , the school system and police department were operated by the state of New Jersey .
-LSB- 29 -RSB- -LSB- 30 -RSB- -LSB- 31 -RSB- -LSB- 32 -RSB- In 2015 Mayor Dana L. Redd announced a $ 830 million plan to continue development on the waterfront .