Cancer is a group of diseases involving abnormal cell growth with the potential to invade or spread to other parts of the body .
Not all tumors are cancerous ; benign tumors do not spread to other parts of the body .
Possible signs and symptoms include a lump , abnormal bleeding , prolonged cough , unexplained weight loss and a change in bowel movements .
While these symptoms may indicate cancer , they may have other causes .
Over 100 types of cancers affect humans .
Tobacco use is the cause of about 22 % of cancer deaths .
Another 10 % is due to obesity , poor diet , lack of physical activity , and excessive drinking of alcohol .
Other factors include certain infections , exposure to ionizing radiation and environmental pollutants .
In the developing world nearly 20 % of cancers are due to infections such as hepatitis B , hepatitis C and human papillomavirus -LRB- HPV -RRB- .
These factors act , at least partly , by changing the genes of a cell .
Typically many genetic changes are required before cancer develops .
Approximately 5 -- 10 % of cancers are due to inherited genetic defects from a person 's parents .
Cancer can be detected by certain signs and symptoms or screening tests .
It is then typically further investigated by medical imaging and confirmed by biopsy .
Many cancers can be prevented by not smoking , maintaining a healthy weight , not drinking too much alcohol , eating plenty of vegetables , fruits and whole grains , vaccination against certain infectious diseases , not eating too much processed and red meat , and avoiding too much sunlight exposure .
Early detection through screening is useful for cervical and colorectal cancer .
The benefits of screening in breast cancer are controversial .
Cancer is often treated with some combination of radiation therapy , surgery , chemotherapy , and targeted therapy .
Pain and symptom management are an important part of care .
Palliative care is particularly important in people with advanced disease .
The chance of survival depends on the type of cancer and extent of disease at the start of treatment .
In children under 15 at diagnosis the five-year survival rate in the developed world is on average 80 % .
For cancer in the United States the average five-year survival rate is 66 % .
In 2015 about 90.5 million people had cancer .
About 14.1 million new cases occur a year -LRB- not including skin cancer other than melanoma -RRB- .
It caused about 8.8 million deaths -LRB- 15.7 % -RRB- of human deaths .
The most common types of cancer in males are lung cancer , prostate cancer , colorectal cancer and stomach cancer .
In females , the most common types are breast cancer , colorectal cancer , lung cancer and cervical cancer .
If skin cancer other than melanoma were included in total new cancers each year it would account for around 40 % of cases .
In children , acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and brain tumors are most common except in Africa where non-Hodgkin lymphoma occurs more often .
In 2012 , about 165,000 children under 15 years of age were diagnosed with cancer .
The risk of cancer increases significantly with age and many cancers occur more commonly in developed countries .
Rates are increasing as more people live to an old age and as lifestyle changes occur in the developing world .
The financial costs of cancer were estimated at $ 1.16 trillion US dollars per year as of 2010 .