Captain America : The Winter Soldier is a 2014 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Captain America , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
It is the sequel to 2011 's Captain America : The First Avenger and the ninth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe -LRB- MCU -RRB- .
The film was directed by Anthony and Joe Russo , with a screenplay by Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely , who had also written The First Avenger .
It stars Chris Evans as Captain America , leading an ensemble cast that includes Scarlett Johansson , Sebastian Stan , Anthony Mackie , Cobie Smulders , Frank Grillo , Emily VanCamp , Hayley Atwell , Robert Redford , and Samuel L. Jackson .
In Captain America : The Winter Soldier , Captain America , Black Widow , and Falcon join forces to uncover a conspiracy within S.H.I.E.L.D. while facing a mysterious assassin known as the Winter Soldier .
A major influence in The Winter Soldier was conspiracy fiction from the 1970s such as Three Days of the Condor , with the script also drawing from the Winter Soldier story arc written by Ed Brubaker .
The script was written in 2011 , with the Russo brothers entering negotiations to direct in June 2012 and casting beginning the following month .
Principal photography commenced in April 2013 in Los Angeles , California before moving to Washington , D.C. and Cleveland , Ohio .
While the directors aimed for more realism , with focus on practical effects and intense stunt work , 2,500 visual effects shots were done by six different companies .
Captain America : The Winter Soldier premiered in Los Angeles on March 13 , 2014 .
It was released internationally on March 26 , 2014 , and in North America on April 4 , 2014 , in 2D , 3D , and IMAX 3D .
The film became a critical and commercial success , grossing over $ 714 million worldwide .
It also received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects .
A sequel titled Captain America : Civil War also directed by the Russo brothers was released on May 6 , 2016 .