Catherine Zeta-Jones , -LRB- -LSB- ˈziːtə -RSB- born 25 September 1969 -RRB- is a Welsh actress .
Born and raised in Swansea , Zeta-Jones aspired to be an actress from a young age .
In her early teens , she played roles in the West End productions of the musicals Annie and Bugsy Malone .
She studied musical theatre at the Arts Educational Schools , London , and made her stage breakthrough with a leading role in a 1987 production of 42nd Street .
Her screen debut came in the unsuccessful French-Italian film 1001 Nights -LRB- 1990 -RRB- , and she went on to find greater success as a regular in the British television series The Darling Buds of May -LRB- 1991 -- 93 -RRB- .
Dismayed at being typecast as the token pretty girl in British films , Zeta-Jones relocated to Los Angeles .
Zeta-Jones initially established herself in Hollywood with roles that highlighted her sex appeal such as in the action film The Mask of Zorro -LRB- 1998 -RRB- and the heist film Entrapment -LRB- 1999 -RRB- .
Critics praised her portrayal of a vengeful pregnant woman in Traffic -LRB- 2000 -RRB- and a murderous singer in the musical Chicago -LRB- 2002 -RRB- .
The latter won her Academy and BAFTA Awards for Best Supporting Actress , among other accolades .
She starred in high-profile films for much of the decade , including the black comedy Intolerable Cruelty -LRB- 2003 -RRB- , the heist film Ocean 's Twelve -LRB- 2004 -RRB- , the comedy The Terminal -LRB- 2004 -RRB- , and the romantic comedy No Reservations -LRB- 2007 -RRB- .
Parts in smaller-scale features were followed by a decrease in workload , during which she returned to stage and portrayed an ageing actress in A Little Night Music -LRB- 2009 -RRB- , winning a Tony Award .
Zeta-Jones continued to work intermittently in the 2010s , starring in the psychological thriller Side Effects -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and the action film Red 2 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- .
Zeta-Jones is the recipient of several accolades , including an Academy Award , a British Academy Film Award and a Tony Award , and in 2010 she was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire -LRB- CBE -RRB- for her film and humanitarian endeavours .
She supports various charities and causes , and is a prominent celebrity endorser of brands .
Her struggle with depression and bipolar II disorder has been well-documented by the media .
She is married to the actor Michael Douglas with whom she has two children .