CBS -LRB- an initialism of the network 's former name , the Columbia Broadcasting System -RRB- is an American English language commercial broadcast television network that is a flagship property of CBS Corporation .
The company is headquartered at the CBS Building in New York City with major production facilities and operations in New York City -LRB- at the CBS Broadcast Center -RRB- and Los Angeles -LRB- at CBS Television City and the CBS Studio Center -RRB- .
CBS is sometimes referred to as the `` Eye Network '' , in reference to the company 's iconic logo , in use since 1951 .
It has also been called the `` Tiffany Network '' , alluding to the perceived high quality of CBS programming during the tenure of William S. Paley .
It can also refer to some of CBS 's first demonstrations of color television , which were held in a former Tiffany & Co. building in New York City in 1950 .
The network has its origins in United Independent Broadcasters Inc. , a collection of 16 radio stations that was purchased by Paley in 1928 and renamed the Columbia Broadcasting System .
Under Paley 's guidance , CBS would first become one of the largest radio networks in the United States , and eventually one of the Big Three American broadcast television networks .
In 1974 , CBS dropped its former full name and became known simply as CBS , Inc. .
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation acquired the network in 1995 , renamed its corporate entity to the current CBS Broadcasting , Inc. in 1997 , and eventually adopted the name of the company it had acquired to become CBS Corporation .
In 2000 , CBS came under the control of Viacom , which was formed as a spin-off of CBS in 1971 .
In late 2005 , Viacom split itself into two separate companies , and re-established CBS Corporation -- through the spin-off of its broadcast television , radio and select cable television and non-broadcasting assets -- with the CBS television network at its core .
CBS Corporation is controlled by Sumner Redstone through National Amusements , which also controls the current Viacom .
CBS continues to operate the CBS Radio network , which now mainly provides news and features content for its portfolio of owned-and-operated radio stations in large and mid-sized markets , and affiliated radio stations in various other markets .
The television network has more than 240 owned-and-operated and affiliated television stations throughout the United States .