Thomas DeCarlo Callaway -LRB- born May 30 , 1974 , better known by his stage name CeeLo Green -LRB- sometimes rendered as Cee Lo Green -RRB- , is an American singer , rapper , songwriter , record producer , actor , and businessman .
Green came to initial prominence as a member of the Southern hip hop group Goodie Mob and later as part of the soul duo Gnarls Barkley , with record producer Danger Mouse .
Subsequently he embarked on a solo career , partially spurred by YouTube popularity .
Internationally , Green is best known for his soul work : his most popular was Gnarls Barkley 's 2006 worldwide hit `` Crazy '' , which reached number 1 in various singles charts worldwide , including the UK .
In the United States , `` Crazy '' reached number two on the Billboard Hot 100 .
Its parent album St. Elsewhere -LRB- 2006 -RRB- , was also a hit , peaked at number 1 on the UK Albums Chart and number 4 on the US Billboard 200 albums chart .
Gnarls Barkley 's second album , The Odd Couple -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , charted at number 12 on the Billboard 200 .
In 2010 , Green took a hiatus from working with Danger Mouse , and released a solo single titled `` Fuck You ! ''
, on August 19 .
The song became a successful single , with the radio-edit version `` Forget You '' , reaching the top spot in the UK and the Netherlands and peaked at number 2 on the US Billboard Hot 100 .
Its parent album , The Lady Killer -LRB- 2010 -RRB- , saw similar success , peaking within the top five of the UK Albums Chart and debuting within the top 10 on the Billboard 200 albums chart , receiving a Gold certification from the BPI in the UK .
His next two singles , `` It 's OK '' and `` Bright Lights Bigger City '' were also hits in Europe .
From 2011 to 2014 , Green was a judge and coach on American reality television singing competition The Voice , appearing on four of its seasons .
In 2013 , Green reunited with the rest of Goodie Mob , to release their fifth studio album Age Against the Machine .
In 2011 he did a concert with Prince in Madison Square Garden .
He worked as a voice actor in the animated feature Hotel Transylvania -LRB- 2012 -RRB- , and also appeared in a few television programs and films -- including his own show , CeeLo Green 's The Good Life , on TBS .
Green has endorsed 7 Up , Duracell , M&M 's , and sake brand TY KU .
His work has earned numerous awards and accolades , including five Grammy Awards , a BET Award , a Billboard Award , and a Brit Award .