Céline Marie Claudette Dion , -LRB- -LSB- ˈdiːɒn -RSB- -LSB- seˈlɪn dziˈjɔ̃ -RSB- ; born 30 March 1968 -RRB- is a Canadian singer and businesswoman .
Born into a large family from Charlemagne , Quebec , Dion emerged as a teen star in the French-speaking world after her manager and future husband René Angélil mortgaged his home to finance her first record .
Dion first gained international recognition in the 1980s by winning both the 1982 Yamaha World Popular Song Festival and the 1988 Eurovision Song Contest where she represented Switzerland .
Following a series of French albums during the 1980s , she signed on to Epic Records in the United States .
In 1990 , Dion released her debut English-language album , Unison , establishing herself as a viable pop artist in North America and other English-speaking areas of the world .
During the 1990s , with the help of Angélil , she achieved worldwide fame after releasing several English albums along with additional French albums .
Her albums , Falling into You -LRB- 1996 -RRB- and Let 's Talk About Love -LRB- 1997 -RRB- , were both certified diamond in the US while D'eux -LRB- 1995 -RRB- became the best-selling French-language album of all time .
She also scored a series of international number-one hits , including `` Nothing Broken but My Heart '' , `` The Power of Love '' , `` Think Twice '' , `` Because You Loved Me '' , `` It 's All Coming Back to Me Now '' , `` My Heart Will Go On '' , and `` I 'm Your Angel . ''
However , in 1999 at the height of her success , Dion announced a hiatus from entertainment to start a family and spend time with her husband , who had been diagnosed with cancer .
She returned to the top of pop music in 2002 and signed to perform nightly in A New Day ... -LRB- 2003 -- 07 -RRB- , a five-star theatrical show at the Colosseum at Caesars Palace , on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise , Nevada .
It became the most successful residency show of all time , grossing US $ 385 million .
Dion 's music has been influenced by genres ranging from rock and R&B to gospel and classical .
Her recordings are mainly in French and English , although she also sings in Spanish , Italian , German , Latin , Japanese , and Mandarin Chinese .
While her releases have often received mixed critical reception , she is regarded as one of pop music 's most influential voices .
Dion has won five Grammy Awards , including Album of the Year and Record of the Year .
She is the second best-selling female artist in the US during the Nielsen SoundScan era .
In 2003 , Dion was honoured by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry -LRB- IFPI -RRB- for selling over 50 million albums in Europe .
Dion remains the best-selling Canadian artist and one of the best-selling artists of all time with record sales of over 200 million copies worldwide .