Central America -LRB- América Central or Centroamérica -RRB- is the southernmost , isthmian portion of the North American continent , which connects with South America on the southeast .
Central America is bordered by Mexico to the north , Colombia to the southeast , the Caribbean Sea to the east , and the Pacific Ocean to the west .
Central America consists of seven countries : Belize , Costa Rica , El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras , Nicaragua , and Panama .
The combined population of Central America is between 41,739,000 -LRB- 2009 estimate -RRB- and 42,688,190 -LRB- 2012 estimate -RRB- .
Central America is a part of the Mesoamerican biodiversity hotspot , which extends from northern Guatemala through to central Panama .
Due to the presence of several active geologic faults and the Central America Volcanic Arc , there is a great deal of seismic activity in the region .
Volcanic eruptions and earthquakes occur frequently ; these natural disasters have resulted in the loss of many lives and much property .
In the Pre-Columbian era , Central America was inhabited by the indigenous peoples of Mesoamerica to the north and west and the Isthmo-Colombian peoples to the south and east .
Soon after Christopher Columbus 's voyages to the Americas , the Spanish began to colonize the Americas .
From 1609 until 1821 , most of the territory within Central America -- except for the lands that would become Belize and Panama -- was governed by the Viceroyalty of New Spain from Mexico City as the Captaincy General of Guatemala .
After New Spain achieved independence from Spain in 1821 , some of its provinces were annexed to the First Mexican Empire , but soon seceded from Mexico to form the Federal Republic of Central America , which lasted from 1823 to 1838 .
The seven states finally became independent autonomous states : beginning with Nicaragua , Honduras , Costa Rica , and Guatemala -LRB- 1838 -RRB- ; followed by El Salvador -LRB- 1841 -RRB- ; then Panama -LRB- 1903 -RRB- ; and finally Belize -LRB- 1981 -RRB- .