Cerebral palsy -LRB- CP -RRB- is a group of permanent movement disorders that appear in early childhood .
Signs and symptoms vary among people .
Often , symptoms include poor coordination , stiff muscles , weak muscles , and tremors .
There may be problems with sensation , vision , hearing , swallowing , and speaking .
Often babies with cerebral palsy do not roll over , sit , crawl , or walk as early as other children of their age .
Other symptoms include seizures and problems with thinking or reasoning , each of which occurs in about one third of people with CP .
While the symptoms may get more noticeable over the first few years of life , the underlying problems do not worsen over time .
Cerebral palsy is caused by abnormal development or damage to the parts of the brain that control movement , balance , and posture .
Most often the problems occur during pregnancy ; however , they may also occur during childbirth , or shortly after birth .
Often the cause is unknown .
Risk factors include preterm birth , being a twin , certain infections during pregnancy such as toxoplasmosis or rubella , exposure to methylmercury during pregnancy , a difficult delivery , and head trauma during the first few years of life , among others .
About 2 % of cases are believed to be due to an inherited genetic cause .
A number of sub-types are classified based on the specific problems present .
For example , those with stiff muscles have spastic cerebral palsy , those with poor coordination have ataxic cerebral palsy , and those with writhing movements have athetoid cerebral palsy .
Diagnosis is based on the child 's development over time .
Blood tests and medical imaging may be used to rule out other possible causes .
CP is partly preventable through immunization of the mother and efforts to prevent head injuries in children such as through improved safety .
There is no cure for CP ; however , supportive treatments , medications , and surgery may help many individuals .
This may include physical therapy , occupational therapy , and speech therapy .
Medications such as diazepam , baclofen , and botulinum toxin may help relax stiff muscles .
Surgery may include lengthening muscles and cutting overly active nerves .
Often external braces and other assistive technology are helpful .
Some affected children can achieve near normal adult lives with appropriate treatment .
While alternative medicines are frequently used there is no evidence to support their use .
CP is the most common movement disorder in children .
It occurs in about 2.1 per 1,000 live births .
Cerebral palsy has been documented throughout history with the first known descriptions occurring in the work of Hippocrates in the 5th century BCE .
Extensive study of the condition began in the 19th century by William John Little , after whom spastic diplegia was called `` Little disease '' .
William Osler first named it `` cerebral palsy '' from the German `` zerebrale Kinderlähmung '' -LRB- cerebral child-paralysis -RRB- .
A number of potential treatments are being examined , including stem cell therapy .
However , more research is required to determine if it is effective and safe .