Cersei Lannister is a fictional character in the A Song of Ice and Fire series of fantasy novels by American author George R. R. Martin , and its television adaptation Game of Thrones , where she is portrayed by Lena Headey .
In the novels , she is a point of view character .
Introduced in 1996 's A Game of Thrones , Cersei is a member of House Lannister , one of the wealthiest and most powerful families in the kingdom of Westeros .
She subsequently appeared in A Clash of Kings -LRB- 1998 -RRB- and A Storm of Swords -LRB- 2000 -RRB- .
She becomes a prominent point of view character in the novels beginning in A Feast for Crows -LRB- 2005 -RRB- and A Dance with Dragons -LRB- 2011 -RRB- .
The character will also appear in the forthcoming volume The Winds of Winter .
In the story , Cersei Lannister , Queen of the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros , is the wife of King Robert Baratheon .
Her father arranged the marriage , after his attempt to betroth her to Rhaegar Targaryen as she wanted failed and Targaryen dynasty lost the war , initiating himself as a political counselor for the newly crowned King Robert .
The Lannisters are the richest family in Westeros and helped him to win the Throne , which is why Robert was interested in a marriage between them .
Cersei has a twin brother , Jaime , with whom she has been involved in an incestuous affair .
All three of Cersei 's children are Jaime 's .
Cersei 's main character attribute is her desire for power and her ambition .
Headey has garnered enormous praise for her portrayal of the character on the HBO series Game of Thrones .
Headey has been nominated for three Emmy Awards for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series and a Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actress for her performance .
She and the rest of the cast were nominated for Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series in 2012 , 2014 , 2015 and 2016 .
In season 5 , a young version of the character is portrayed by Nell Williams in a flashback .