Charlotte -LSB- ˈʃɑrlət -RSB- is the largest city in the state of North Carolina .
It is the county seat of Mecklenburg County and the second-largest city in the southeastern United States , just behind Jacksonville , Florida .
Charlotte is the third-fastest growing major city in the United States .
In 2014 the estimated population of Charlotte according to the U.S. Census Bureau was 809,958 , making it the 17th-largest city in the United States based on population .
The Charlotte metropolitan area ranks 22nd-largest in the U.S. , and had a 2014 population of 2,380,314 .
The Charlotte metropolitan area is part of a sixteen-county market region or combined statistical area with a 2014 U.S. Census population estimate of 2,537,990 .
Residents of Charlotte are referred to as `` Charlotteans '' .
It is listed as a `` gamma-plus '' global city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network .
Charlotte is home to the corporate headquarters of Bank of America and the east coast operations of Wells Fargo , which along with other financial institutions made it the second-largest banking center in the United States from 1995 to 2017 and the third-largest from 2017 to present .
Among Charlotte 's many notable attractions , some of the most popular include the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League -LRB- NFL -RRB- , the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association -LRB- NBA -RRB- , the Charlotte Independence of the United Soccer League -LRB- USL -RRB- , two NASCAR Sprint Cup races and the NASCAR All-Star Race , the Wells Fargo Championship , the NASCAR Hall of Fame , the Charlotte Ballet , Carowinds amusement park , and the U.S. National Whitewater Center .
Charlotte Douglas International Airport is a major international hub , and was ranked the 23rd-busiest airport in the world by passenger traffic in 2013 .
Charlotte has a humid subtropical climate .
The city is located several miles east of the Catawba River and southeast of Lake Norman , the largest man-made lake in North Carolina .
Lake Wylie and Mountain Island Lake are two smaller man-made lakes located near the city .