Charles Milles Manson -LRB- born Charles Milles Maddox , November 12 , 1934 -RRB- is an American criminal and former cult leader who led what became known as the Manson Family , a quasi-commune that arose in California in the late 1960s .
Manson 's followers committed a series of nine murders at four locations in July and August of 1969 .
In 1971 he was found guilty of first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder for the deaths of seven people -LRB- Abigail Ann Folger , Wojciech Frykowski , Steven Earl Parent , Sharon Tate Polanski , Jay Sebring , and Leno and Rosemary La Bianca -RRB- -- most notably of the actress Sharon Tate -- all of which were carried out by members of the group at his instruction .
Manson was originally sentenced to death ; however , his death sentence was converted to life with the possibility of parole when in 1972 , the death penalty in California was ruled unconstitutional .
California did not have the life-without-parole sentence at the time .
Manson also received first-degree murder convictions for the deaths of Gary Hinman and Donald `` Shorty '' Shea .
He is currently serving a life sentence at California State Prison , Corcoran , in Corcoran , California .
Manson believed in what he called `` Helter Skelter '' , a term he took from the Beatles ' song of the same name .
Manson believed Helter Skelter to be an impending apocalyptic race war , which he described in his own version of the lyrics to the Beatles ' song .
He believed the murders would help precipitate that war .
From the beginning of his notoriety , a pop culture arose around him in which he ultimately became an emblem of insanity , violence and the macabre .
At the time the Family began to form , Manson was an unemployed former convict , who had spent half of his life in correctional institutions for a variety of offenses .
Before the murders , he was a singer-songwriter on the fringe of the Los Angeles music industry , chiefly through a chance association with Dennis Wilson , drummer and founding member of the Beach Boys .
After Manson was charged with the crimes of which he was later convicted , recordings of songs written and performed by him were released commercially .
Various musicians have covered some of his songs .