Charles II -LRB- 29 May 1630 -- 6 February 1685 -RRB- was king of England , Scotland and Ireland .
He was king of Scotland from 1649 until his deposition in 1651 , and king of England , Scotland and Ireland from the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 until his death .
Charles II 's father , Charles I , was executed at Whitehall on 30 January 1649 , at the climax of the English Civil War .
Although the Parliament of Scotland proclaimed Charles II king on 5 February 1649 , England entered the period known as the English Interregnum or the English Commonwealth , and the country was a de facto republic , led by Oliver Cromwell .
Cromwell defeated Charles II at the Battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651 , and Charles fled to mainland Europe .
Cromwell became virtual dictator of England , Scotland and Ireland , and Charles spent the next nine years in exile in France , the Dutch Republic and the Spanish Netherlands .
A political crisis that followed the death of Cromwell in 1658 resulted in the restoration of the monarchy , and Charles was invited to return to Britain .
On 29 May 1660 , his 30th birthday , he was received in London to public acclaim .
After 1660 , all legal documents were dated as if he had succeeded his father as king in 1649 .
Charles 's English parliament enacted laws known as the Clarendon Code , designed to shore up the position of the re-established Church of England .
Charles acquiesced to the Clarendon Code even though he favoured a policy of religious tolerance .
The major foreign policy issue of his early reign was the Second Anglo-Dutch War .
In 1670 , he entered into the secret treaty of Dover , an alliance with his first cousin King Louis XIV of France .
Louis agreed to aid him in the Third Anglo-Dutch War and pay him a pension , and Charles secretly promised to convert to Catholicism at an unspecified future date .
Charles attempted to introduce religious freedom for Catholics and Protestant dissenters with his 1672 Royal Declaration of Indulgence , but the English Parliament forced him to withdraw it .
In 1679 , Titus Oates 's revelations of a supposed `` Popish Plot '' sparked the Exclusion Crisis when it was revealed that Charles 's brother and heir -LRB- James , Duke of York -RRB- was a Catholic .
The crisis saw the birth of the pro-exclusion Whig and anti-exclusion Tory parties .
Charles sided with the Tories , and , following the discovery of the Rye House Plot to murder Charles and James in 1683 , some Whig leaders were executed or forced into exile .
Charles dissolved the English Parliament in 1681 , and ruled alone until his death on 6 February 1685 .
He was received into the Roman Catholic Church on his deathbed .
Charles was popularly known as the Merry Monarch , in reference to both the liveliness and hedonism of his court and the general relief at the return to normality after over a decade of rule by Cromwell and the Puritans .
Charles 's wife , Catherine of Braganza , bore no live children , but Charles acknowledged at least twelve illegitimate children by various mistresses .
He was succeeded by his brother James .