Chicago -LRB- -LSB- ʃᵻˈkɑːɡoʊ -RSB- or -LSB- ʃᵻˈkɔːɡoʊ -RSB- -RRB- , officially the City of Chicago , is the third-most populous city in the United States .
With over 2.7 million residents , it is also the most populous city in both the state of Illinois and the Midwestern United States .
It is the county seat of Cook County .
The Chicago metropolitan area , often referred to as Chicagoland , has nearly 10 million people and is the third-largest in the U.S. Chicago has been called a global architecture capital .
In terms of wealth and economy , Chicago is considered one of the most important business centers in the world .
Chicago was incorporated as a city in 1837 , near a portage between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River watershed , and grew rapidly in the mid-nineteenth century .
Positioned along Lake Michigan , the city is an international hub for finance , commerce , industry , technology , telecommunications , and transportation : O'Hare International Airport is the second-busiest airport in the world when measured by aircraft traffic ; the region also has the largest number of U.S. highways and rail road freight .
In 2012 , Chicago was listed as an alpha global city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network , and ranked seventh in the world in the 2016 Global Cities Index .
Chicago has the third-largest gross metropolitan product in the United States -- about $ 640 billion according to 2015 estimates .
The city has one of the world 's largest and most diversified economies with no single industry employing more than 14 % of the workforce .
In 2016 , Chicago hosted over 54 million domestic and international visitors , a new record making it one of the top visited cities in the nation .
Landmarks in the city include Millennium Park , Navy Pier , the Magnificent Mile , Art Institute of Chicago , Museum Campus , the Willis -LRB- Sears -RRB- Tower , Museum of Science and Industry , and Lincoln Park Zoo .
Chicago 's culture includes the visual arts , novels , film , theater , especially improvisational comedy , and music , particularly jazz , blues , soul , hip hop , gospel and house music .
There are many colleges and universities in the Chicago area ; among these , Northwestern University , University of Chicago , and the University of Illinois at Chicago are classified as `` highest research '' doctoral universities .
Additionally , Chicago has professional sports teams in each of the major professional leagues .
The city has many nicknames , the best-known being the Windy City .