Chile , is a South American country occupying a long , narrow strip of land between the Andes to the east and the Pacific Ocean to the west .
It borders Peru to the north , Bolivia to the northeast , Argentina to the east , and the Drake Passage in the far south .
Chilean territory includes the Pacific islands of Juan Fernández , Salas y Gómez , Desventuradas , and Easter Island in Oceania .
Chile also claims about 1250000 km2 of Antarctica , although all claims are suspended under the Antarctic Treaty .
The arid Atacama Desert in northern Chile contains great mineral wealth , principally copper .
The relatively small central area dominates in terms of population and agricultural resources , and is the cultural and political center from which Chile expanded in the late 19th century when it incorporated its northern and southern regions .
Southern Chile is rich in forests and grazing lands , and features a string of volcanoes and lakes .
The southern coast is a labyrinth of fjords , inlets , canals , twisting peninsulas , and islands .
Spain conquered and colonized Chile in the mid-16th century , replacing Inca rule in northern and central Chile , but failing to conquer the independent Mapuche who inhabited south-central Chile .
After declaring its independence from Spain in 1818 , Chile emerged in the 1830s as a relatively stable authoritarian republic .
In the 19th century , Chile saw significant economic and territorial growth , ending Mapuche resistance in the 1880s and gaining its current northern territory in the War of the Pacific -LRB- 1879 -- 83 -RRB- after defeating Peru and Bolivia .
In the 1960s and 1970s the country experienced severe left-right political polarization and turmoil .
This development culminated with the 1973 Chilean coup d'état that overthrew Salvador Allende 's democratically elected left-wing government and instituted a 16-year-long right-wing military dictatorship that left more than 3,000 people dead or missing .
The regime , headed by Augusto Pinochet , ended in 1990 after it lost a referendum in 1988 and was succeeded by a center-left coalition which ruled through four presidencies until 2010 .
Chile is today one of South America 's most stable and prosperous nations .
It leads Latin American nations in rankings of human development , competitiveness , income per capita , globalization , state of peace , economic freedom , and low perception of corruption .
It also ranks high regionally in sustainability of the state , and democratic development .
Chile is a founding member of the United Nations , the Union of South American Nations -LRB- UNASUR -RRB- and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States -LRB- CELAC -RRB- .