China , officially the People 's Republic of China -LRB- PRC -RRB- , is a unitary sovereign state in East Asia and the world 's most populous country , with a population of over 1.381 billion .
Covering approximately 9.6 e6km2 , China is the world 's second-largest state by land area and third - or fourth-largest by total area .
Governed by the Communist Party of China , it exercises jurisdiction over 22 provinces , five autonomous regions , four direct-controlled municipalities -LRB- Beijing , Tianjin , Shanghai and Chongqing -RRB- and the Special Administrative Regions Hong Kong and Macau , also claiming sovereignty over Taiwan .
China is a great power and a major regional power within Asia , and has been characterized as a potential superpower .
China emerged as one of the world 's earliest civilizations in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain .
For millennia , China 's political system was based on hereditary monarchies , or dynasties , beginning with the legendary Xia dynasty .
Since 221 , when the Qin dynasty conquered the other largest six states to form the first unified Chinese empire , China has then expanded , fractured and re-unified numerous times in the following millennia .
In 1912 , the Republic of China -LRB- ROC -RRB- replaced the last dynasty and ruled the Chinese mainland until 1949 , when it was defeated by the communist People 's Liberation Army in the Chinese Civil War .
The Communist Party established the People 's Republic of China in Beijing on 1 October 1949 , while the ROC government relocated to Taiwan with its present de facto temporary capital in Taipei .
Both the ROC and PRC continue to claim to be the legitimate government of all China , though the latter has more recognition in the world and controls more territory .
China has had the largest economy in the world for much of the last two thousand years , during which it has seen cycles of prosperity and decline .
Since the introduction of economic reforms in 1978 , China has become one of the world 's fastest-growing major economies .
, it is the world 's second-largest economy by nominal GDP and largest by purchasing power parity -LRB- PPP -RRB- .
China is also the world 's largest exporter and second-largest importer of goods .
China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world 's largest standing army and second-largest defense budget .
The PRC is a member of the United Nations , as it replaced the ROC as a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council in 1971 .
China is also a member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations , including the WTO , APEC , BRICS , the Shanghai Cooperation Organization -LRB- SCO -RRB- , the BCIM and the G-20 .