Christopher Gilbert `` Chris '' Pérez -LRB- born August 14 , 1969 -RRB- is an American guitarist , songwriter and author best known as lead guitarist for the Tejano band Selena y Los Dinos .
He married the frontwoman of the group , Selena , on April 2 , 1992 .
Pérez grew up in San Antonio , Texas as one of two children of Gilbert Pérez and Carmen Medina .
In 1986 , he joined Shelly Lares ' band .
By the late 1980s , Pérez was reputed among Tejano musicians for his guitar skills .
This caught A.B. Quintanilla 's attention ; at the time , Quintanilla was seeking another guitarist for the band he produced , Selena y Los Dinos .
Between one and two years after Pérez joined the band , he and Selena began a personal relationship .
Selena 's father , Abraham Quintanilla , Jr. , forced them to end their relationship because he felt Pérez ' image might damage Selena 's career .
They ignored his threats to disband the group , and continued their relationship .
Quintanilla Jr. fired Pérez from the band , forbidding Selena to go with him .
They later eloped , and Selena 's father accepted the relationship and he grew to love and accept Chris as his son-in-law .
Pérez was asked to collaborate on several of Selena 's songs with A.B. and other members of the band , using his guitar to piece out melodies and incorporating a number of musical genres into their songs .
During the early 1990s , Pérez was arrested for driving under the influence in San Antonio , but was released without charge .
Within months of his first arrest , Pérez was involved in a trashed-hotel-room incident ; he and two members of Selena y Los Dinos were intoxicated and began wrestling in a room , breaking the door and punching holes in the walls .
On March 31 , 1995 Selena was killed by her former friend and former manager of her boutiques , Yolanda Saldívar .
Selena 's murder greatly devastated Pérez , who began abusing drugs and alcohol .
Chris has since remained in touch with the Quintanillas following Selena 's death .
In 1998 he met Venessa Villanueva through his friend John Garza , and began dating her .
That year , Pérez formed the Chris Pérez Band and began writing songs for their debut album .
They signed with Hollywood Records and released their first album , Resurrection , which won a Grammy Award for Best Latin Rock or Alternative Album .
The band disbanded after their second album , Una Noche Mas -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , was released .
Pérez and Villanueva had two children , Cassie and Noah , before divorcing in 2008 .
Pérez continued in the music business and often played with his brother-in-law A.B. 's groups , the Kumbia Kings and the Kumbia All Starz .
He left both groups and formed another band -LRB- the Chris Pérez Project , which included Puerto Rican singer Angel Ferrer -RRB- in 2010 .
In 2012 Pérez wrote a book about his and Selena 's relationship and marriage life entitled To Selena , with Love which received a positive reception from critics and fans .