ChristianityFrom Ancient Greek Χριστός , Khristós -LRB- Latinized as Christus -RRB- , translating Hebrew מָשִׁיחַ , Māšîăḥ , meaning `` the anointed one '' , with the Latin suffixes - ian and - itas .
is an Abrahamic monotheistic religion based on the life and teachings of Jesus Christ , who serves as the focal point for the religion .
It is the world 's largest religion , with over 2.4 billion followers , or 33 % of the global population , known as Christians .
Christians believe that Jesus is the Son of God and the savior of humanity whose coming as the Messiah -LRB- the Christ -RRB- was prophesied in the Old Testament .
Christian theology is summarized in creeds such as the Apostles ' Creed and Nicene Creed .
These professions of faith state that Jesus suffered , died , was buried , descended into hell , and rose from the dead , in order to grant eternal life to those who believe in him and trust in him for the remission of their sins .
The creeds further maintain that Jesus bodily ascended into heaven , where he reigns with God the Father in the unity of the Holy Spirit , and that he will return to judge the living and the dead and grant eternal life to his followers .
His incarnation , earthly ministry , crucifixion and resurrection are often referred to as `` the gospel '' , meaning `` good news '' .
`` Good news '' is a translation of the Ancient Greek term εὐαγγέλιον euangélion , from which the terms evangelical and evangelism derive .
The term gospel also refers to written accounts of Jesus 's life and teaching , four of which -- Matthew , Mark , Luke and John -- are considered canonical and included in the Christian Bible .
Christianity is an Abrahamic religion that began as a Second Temple Judaic sect in the mid-1st century .
Originating in Judea , it quickly spread to Europe , Syria , Mesopotamia , Asia Minor , Transcaucasia , Egypt , Ethiopia and India , and by the end of the 4th century had become the official state church of the Roman Empire .
Following the Age of Discovery , Christianity spread to the Americas , Australasia , sub-Saharan Africa and the rest of the world through missionary work and colonization .
Christianity has played a prominent role in the shaping of Western civilization .
Throughout its history , Christianity has weathered schisms and theological disputes that have resulted in many distinct churches and denominations .
Worldwide , the three largest branches of Christianity are the Catholic Church , the Eastern Orthodox Church and the various denominations of Protestantism .
The Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches broke communion with each other in the East -- West Schism of 1054 ; Protestantism came into existence in the Reformation of the 16th century , splitting from the Catholic Church .