Sid Meier 's Civilization IV is a turn-based strategy computer game and the fourth installment of the Civilization series .
It was designed by Soren Johnson under the direction of Sid Meier and his video game development studio Firaxis Games .
It was released in North America , Europe , and Australia , between October 25 and November 4 , 2005 .
Civilization IV uses the 4X empire-building model for turn-based strategy gameplay , in which the player 's main objective is to construct a civilization from limited initial resources .
Most standard full-length games start the player with a settler unit and/or a city unit in the year 4000 BC .
As with other games in the series , there are by default five objectives the player can pursue in order to finish the game : conquering all other civilizations , controlling a supermajority of the game world 's land and population , building and sending the first sleeper ship to the Alpha Centauri star system , increasing the `` Culture ratings '' of at least three different cities to `` legendary '' levels , or winning a `` World Leader '' popularity contest by the United Nations .
If the time limit for the game is reached and none of the previous goals has been fulfilled by any players including game AI players , the civilization with the highest total game score is declared winner .
A large departure from earlier Civilization games is a new graphics engine created from scratch , based on the Gamebryo engine by Numerical Design Limited -LRB- NDL -RRB- .
The game has received critical acclaim and was hailed as an exemplary product of one of the leading video game producers in the turn-based strategy genre .
Civilization IV has sold 3 million copies and won multiple awards , including several Game of the Year awards .
In addition to this , Firaxis Games has also released two major expansions , Civilization IV : Warlords and Civilization IV : Beyond the Sword , as well as the standalone game Civilization IV : Colonization , which were all combined in 2009 into one release edition titled Sid Meier 's Civilization IV : The Complete Edition .