The Colosseum or Coliseum -LRB- -LSB- kɒləˈsiːəm -RSB- -RRB- , also known as the Flavian Amphitheatre -LRB- Latin : Amphitheatrum Flavium ; Italian : Anfiteatro Flavio -LSB- aŋfiteˈaːtro ˈflaːvjo -RSB- or Colosseo -LSB- kolosˈsɛːo -RSB- -RRB- , is an oval amphitheatre in the centre of the city of Rome , Italy .
Built of concrete and sand , it is the largest amphitheatre ever built .
The Colosseum is situated just east of the Roman Forum .
Construction began under the emperor Vespasian in AD 72 , and was completed in AD 80 under his successor and heir Titus .
Further modifications were made during the reign of Domitian -LRB- 81 -- 96 -RRB- .
These three emperors are known as the Flavian dynasty , and the amphitheatre was named in Latin for its association with their family name -LRB- Flavius -RRB- .
The Colosseum could hold , it is estimated , between 50,000 and 80,000 spectators , having an average audience of some 65,000 ; it was used for gladiatorial contests and public spectacles such as mock sea battles -LRB- for only a short time as the hypogeum was soon filled in with mechanisms to support the other activities -RRB- , animal hunts , executions , re-enactments of famous battles , and dramas based on Classical mythology .
The building ceased to be used for entertainment in the early medieval era .
It was later reused for such purposes as housing , workshops , quarters for a religious order , a fortress , a quarry , and a Christian shrine .
Although partially ruined because of damage caused by earthquakes and stone-robbers , the Colosseum is still an iconic symbol of Imperial Rome .
It is one of Rome 's most popular tourist attractions and also has links to the Roman Catholic Church , as each Good Friday the Pope leads a torchlit `` Way of the Cross '' procession that starts in the area around the Colosseum .
The Colosseum is also depicted on the Italian version of the five-cent euro coin .
The Colosseum 's original Latin name was Amphitheatrum Flavium , often anglicized as Flavian Amphitheatre .
The building was constructed by emperors of the Flavian dynasty , following the reign of Nero .
This name is still used in modern English , but generally the structure is better known as the Colosseum .
In antiquity , Romans may have referred to the Colosseum by the unofficial name Amphitheatrum Caesareum -LRB- with Caesareum an adjective pertaining to the title Caesar -RRB- , but this name may have been strictly poetic as it was not exclusive to the Colosseum ; Vespasian and Titus , builders of the Colosseum , also constructed an amphitheater of the same name in Puteoli -LRB- modern Pozzuoli -RRB- .
The name Colosseum has long been believed to be derived from a colossal statue of Nero nearby -LRB- the statue of Nero was named after the Colossus of Rhodes -RRB- .
This statue was later remodeled by Nero 's successors into the likeness of Helios -LRB- Sol -RRB- or Apollo , the sun god , by adding the appropriate solar crown .
Nero 's head was also replaced several times with the heads of succeeding emperors .
Despite its pagan links , the statue remained standing well into the medieval era and was credited with magical powers .
It came to be seen as an iconic symbol of the permanence of Rome .
In the 8th century , a famous epigram attributed to the Venerable Bede celebrated the symbolic significance of the statue in a prophecy that is variously quoted : Quamdiu stat Colisæus , stat et Roma ; quando cadet colisæus , cadet et Roma ; quando cadet Roma , cadet et mundus -LRB- `` as long as the Colossus stands , so shall Rome ; when the Colossus falls , Rome shall fall ; when Rome falls , so falls the world '' -RRB- .
This is often mistranslated to refer to the Colosseum rather than the Colossus -LRB- as in , for instance , Byron 's poem Childe Harold 's Pilgrimage -RRB- .
However , at the time that the Pseudo-Bede wrote , the masculine noun coliseus was applied to the statue rather than to what was still known as the Flavian amphitheatre .
The Colossus did eventually fall , possibly being pulled down to reuse its bronze .
By the year 1000 the name `` Colosseum '' had been coined to refer to the amphitheatre .
The statue itself was largely forgotten and only its base survives , situated between the Colosseum and the nearby Temple of Venus and Roma .
The name further evolved to Coliseum during the Middle Ages .
In Italy , the amphitheatre is still known as il Colosseo , and other Romance languages have come to use similar forms such as Coloseumul -LRB- Romanian -RRB- , le Colisée -LRB- French -RRB- , el Coliseo -LRB- Spanish -RRB- and o Coliseu -LRB- Portuguese -RRB- .