The Columbia River is the largest river in the Pacific Northwest region of North America .
The river rises in the Rocky Mountains of British Columbia , Canada .
It flows northwest and then south into the US state of Washington , then turns west to form most of the border between Washington and the state of Oregon before emptying into the Pacific Ocean .
The river is 1243 mi long , and its largest tributary is the Snake River .
Its drainage basin is roughly the size of France and extends into seven US states and a Canadian province .
By volume the fourth-largest river in the United States , the Columbia has the greatest flow of any North American river entering the Pacific .
The Columbia and its tributaries have been central to the region 's culture and economy for thousands of years .
They have been used for transportation since ancient times , linking the many cultural groups of the region .
The river system hosts many species of anadromous fish , which migrate between freshwater habitats and the saline waters of the Pacific Ocean .
These fish -- especially the salmon species -- provided the core subsistence for native peoples .
In the late 18th century , a private American ship became the first non-indigenous vessel to enter the river ; it was followed by a British explorer , who navigated past the Oregon Coast Range into the Willamette Valley .
In the following decades , fur trading companies used the Columbia as a key transportation route .
Overland explorers entered the Willamette Valley through the scenic but treacherous Columbia River Gorge , and pioneers began to settle the valley in increasing numbers .
Steamships along the river linked communities and facilitated trade ; the arrival of railroads in the late 19th century , many running along the river , supplemented these links .
Since the late 19th century , public and private sectors have heavily developed the river .
To aid ship and barge navigation , locks have been built along the lower Columbia and its tributaries , and dredging has opened , maintained , and enlarged shipping channels .
Since the early 20th century , dams have been built across the river for power generation , navigation , irrigation , and flood control .
The 14 hydroelectric dams on the Columbia 's main stem and many more on its tributaries produce more than 44 percent of total U.S. hydroelectric generation .
Production of nuclear power has taken place at two sites along the river .
Plutonium for nuclear weapons was produced for decades at the Hanford Site , which is now the most contaminated nuclear site in the US .
These developments have greatly altered river environments in the watershed , mainly through industrial pollution and barriers to fish migration .