Crash is a 2004 American ensemble drama film co-written , produced , and directed by Paul Haggis .
The film is about racial and social tensions in Los Angeles .
A self-described `` passion piece '' for Haggis , Crash was inspired by a real-life incident , in which his Porsche was carjacked in 1991 outside a video store on Wilshire Boulevard .
Several characters ' stories interweave during two days in Los Angeles : a black detective estranged from his mother ; his criminal younger brother and gang associate ; the white district attorney and his irritated , pampered wife ; a racist white police officer who disgusts his more idealistic younger partner ; an African-American Hollywood director whose wife must deal with the officer ; a Persian-immigrant father who is wary of others ; and a hard-working Hispanic locksmith family man .
The film deals with racism in a rather impartial approach ; rather than separating the characters into victims and offenders , victims of racism are often shown to be prejudiced themselves in different contexts and situations ; racist remarks and actions are often shown to stem from ignorance and misconception rather than malice .
The film features an ensemble cast including , Sandra Bullock , Don Cheadle , Matt Dillon , Jennifer Esposito , William Fichtner , Brendan Fraser , Terrence Howard , Chris `` Ludacris '' Bridges , Thandie Newton , Michael Peña , and Ryan Phillippe .
Matt Dillon was particularly praised for his performance and received Academy Award , BAFTA , Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for Best Supporting Actor .
Additionally , the cast won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture .
The film received six Academy Award nominations , including Best Picture and Best Director for Paul Haggis , and won three for Best Picture , Best Original Screenplay , and Best Film Editing at the 78th Academy Awards .
It was also nominated for nine BAFTA awards , and won two , for Best Original Screenplay and Best Supporting Actress for Thandie Newton .