A cult film , also commonly referred to as a cult classic , is a film that has acquired a cult following .
Cult films are known for their dedicated , passionate fanbase , an elaborate subculture that engage in repeated viewings , quoting dialogue , and audience participation .
Inclusive definitions allow for major studio productions , especially box office bombs , while exclusive definitions focus more on obscure , transgressive films shunned by the mainstream .
The difficulty in defining the term and subjectivity of what qualifies as a cult film mirror classificatory disputes about art .
The term cult film itself was first used in the 1970s to describe the culture that surrounded underground films and midnight movies , though cult was in common use in film analysis for decades prior to that .
Cult films trace their origin back to controversial and suppressed films kept alive by dedicated fans .
In some cases , reclaimed or rediscovered films have acquired cult followings decades after their original release , occasionally for their camp value .
Other cult films have since become well-respected or reassessed as classics ; there is debate as to whether these popular and accepted films are still cult films .
After failing in the cinema , some cult films have become regular fixtures on cable television or profitable sellers on home video .
Others have inspired their own film festivals .
Cult films can both appeal to specific subcultures and form their own subcultures .
Other media that reference cult films can easily identify which demographics they desire to attract and offer savvy fans an opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge .
Cult films frequently break cultural taboos , and many feature excessive displays of violence , gore , sexuality , profanity , or combinations thereof .
This can lead to controversy , censorship , and outright bans ; less transgressive films may attract similar amounts of controversy when critics call them frivolous or incompetent .
Films that fail to attract requisite amounts of controversy may face resistance when labeled as cult films .
Mainstream films and big budget blockbusters have attracted cult followings similar to more underground and lesser known films ; fans of these films often emphasize the films ' niche appeal and reject the more popular aspects .
Fans who like the films for the wrong reasons , such as perceived elements that represent mainstream appeal and marketing , will often be ostracized or ridiculed .
Likewise , fans who stray from accepted subcultural scripts may experience similar rejection .
Since the late 1970s , cult films have become increasingly popular .
Films that once would have been limited to obscure cult followings are now capable of breaking into the mainstream , and showings of cult films have proved to be a profitable business venture .
Overbroad usage of the term has resulted in controversy , as purists state it has become a meaningless descriptor applied to any film that is the slightest bit weird or unconventional ; others accuse Hollywood studios of trying to artificially create cult films or use the term as a marketing tactic .
Films are frequently stated to be an `` instant cult classic '' now , occasionally before they are released .
Fickle fans on the Internet have latched on to unreleased films only to abandon them later on release .
At the same time , other films have acquired massive , quick cult followings , thanks to spreading virally through social media .
Easy access to cult films via video on demand and peer-to-peer file sharing has led some critics to pronounce the death of cult films .