Cynthia Ann Stephanie `` Cyndi '' Lauper -LRB- born June 22 , 1953 -RRB- is an American singer , songwriter , actress and LGBTQ activist .
Her career has spanned over 30 years .
Her debut solo album She 's So Unusual -LRB- 1983 -RRB- was the first debut female album to chart four top-five hits on the Billboard Hot 100 -- `` Girls Just Want to Have Fun '' , `` Time After Time '' , `` She Bop '' , and `` All Through the Night '' -- and earned Lauper the Best New Artist award at the 27th Grammy Awards in 1985 .
Her success continued with the soundtrack for the motion picture The Goonies and her second record True Colors -LRB- 1986 -RRB- .
This album included the number one single `` True Colors '' and `` Change of Heart '' , which peaked at number 3 .
Since 1989 , Lauper has released nine studio albums and participated in many other projects .
In 2010 , Memphis Blues , became Billboard 's most successful blues album of the year , remaining at # 1 on the Billboard Blues Albums chart for 13 consecutive weeks .
In 2013 , Lauper won the Tony Award for Best Original Score for composing the Broadway musical Kinky Boots , making her the first woman to win the category by herself .
The musical was awarded five other Tonys including Tony Award for Best New Musical .
In 2014 , Lauper was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album for the cast recording .
In 2016 , the West End production won Best New Musical at the Olivier Awards
Lauper has established herself as a pop culture icon selling over 50 million records and 20 million singles .
She has won awards at the Grammys , Emmys , Tonys , the New York 's Outer Critics Circle , MTV Video Music Awards -LRB- VMAs -RRB- , Billboard Awards , and American Music Awards -LRB- AMAs -RRB- .
An inductee into both the Songwriters Hall of Fame and the Hollywood Walk of Fame , Lauper is one of the few singers to win three of the four major American entertainment awards -LRB- EGOT -RRB- .
Lauper won the inaugural Best Female Video prize at the 1984 VMAs for Girls Just Want To Have Fun .
This music video is recognized by MTV , VH1 and Rolling Stone Magazine as one of the greatest ever music videos of the era .
She is featured in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Museum 's Women Who Rock exhibit .
Her debut album is included in Rolling Stone '' 's list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , while Time After Time is included in Vh1 's list of the 100 Best Songs of the Past 25 years .
VH1 has ranked Lauper No. 58 of the 100 Greatest Women of Rock & Roll '' .
Lauper has been celebrated for her humanitarian work , particularly as an advocate for LGBT rights in the United States .
Her charitable efforts were acknowledged in 2013 when the singer was invited as a special guest to attend US President Barack Obama 's second-term inaugural .