Daenerys Targaryen is a fictional character in George R. R. Martin 's A Song of Ice and Fire series of novels , as well as the television adaptation , Game of Thrones , where she is portrayed by Emilia Clarke .
In the novels , she is a prominent point of view character .
She is one of the series ' most popular characters .
Introduced in 1996 's A Game of Thrones , Daenerys -LRB- along with her older brother , Viserys -RRB- is one of the last confirmed members of House Targaryen who , until fifteen years before the events of the first novel , had ruled from the Iron Throne for nearly three hundred years .
She subsequently appeared in Martin 's A Clash of Kings -LRB- 1998 -RRB- and A Storm of Swords -LRB- 2000 -RRB- .
Daenerys was one of a few prominent characters not included in 2005 's A Feast for Crows , but returned in the next novel A Dance with Dragons -LRB- 2011 -RRB- .
In the story , Daenerys is a young woman in her early teens living in Essos across the narrow sea .
Knowing no other life than one of exile , she remains dependent on her abusive older brother , Viserys .
The timid and meek girl finds herself betrothed to Dothraki horse lord Khal Drogo , to ensure Viserys an army for his return to Westeros and recapture of the Iron Throne .
Despite this , her brother loses the ability to control her as Daenerys finds herself adapting to life with the khalasar and emerges as a strong , confident and courageous woman .
She becomes the heir of the Targaryen dynasty after her brother 's death and plans to reclaim the Iron Throne herself , seeing it as her birthright .
A pregnant Daenerys loses her husband and child , but soon helps hatch three dragons from their eggs , which regard her as their mother , providing her with a tactical advantage and prestige .
Over time , she struggles to maintain control of her dragons , which grow dangerous .
She also acquires an army with which she conquers the cities of Yunkai , Astapor and Meereen , determined to end slavery and injustice there .
Despite her strong moral compass , she is capable of dealing ruthlessly with her enemies , particularly the slave masters .
Well received by critics and fans alike , Clarke received Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for her performance as Daenerys in the HBO series in 2013 , 2015 , and 2016 .
She has also earned numerous other nominations and accolades for her portrayal .