Daft Punk are a French electronic music duo formed in 1993 by Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo and Thomas Bangalter .
The duo achieved significant popularity in the late 1990s as part of the French house movement and had continuous success in the years following , combining elements of house music with funk , techno , disco , rock music and synthpop influences .
They are also known for their visual stylization and disguises associated with their music ; the duo have worn ornate helmets and gloves to assume robot personas in most of their public appearances since 2001 and rarely grant interviews or appear on television .
The duo were managed from 1996 to 2008 by Pedro Winter -LRB- also known as Busy P -RRB- , the head of Ed Banger Records .
Bangalter and de Homem-Christo were originally briefly in an indie rock band named Darlin ' .
When the group disbanded , it left the two to experiment musically with drum machines and synthesisers .
The duo released their debut studio album Homework through Virgin Records in 1997 to highly positive reviews .
The duo 's next album Discovery -LRB- 2001 -RRB- was even more successful , driven by the release of the hit singles `` One More Time '' , `` Digital Love '' and `` Harder , Better , Faster , Stronger '' .
In March 2005 , the duo released their third album Human After All to mixed reviews .
However , the singles `` Robot Rock '' and `` Technologic '' achieved considerable success in the United Kingdom .
Daft Punk toured throughout 2006 and 2007 and released the live album Alive 2007 , which won a Grammy Award for Best Electronic/Dance Album .
The duo later composed the score for the Disney film Tron : Legacy in 2010 , and released its soundtrack album that same year .
In January 2013 , Daft Punk left Virgin for Columbia Records , and released their next album Random Access Memories in 2013 to worldwide critical acclaim .
The album 's lead single `` Get Lucky '' became an international success , peaking on top 10 charts in 32 countries .
Random Access Memories won five Grammy Awards in 2014 , including Album of the Year and Record of the Year for `` Get Lucky '' .
Daft Punk later gained their first number one on the Billboard Hot 100 with the song `` Starboy '' , a collaboration with The Weeknd .