Damon Albarn , OBE -LRB- -LSB- ˈdeɪmən_ˈælbɑrn -RSB- born 23 March 1968 -RRB- is an English musician , singer , songwriter , multi-instrumentalist and record producer .
He is the lead singer of the British rock band Blur and co-founder , vocalist , instrumentalist and principal songwriter of the virtual band Gorillaz .
Raised in Leytonstone , East London and around Colchester , Essex , Albarn attended the Stanway School , where he met Graham Coxon and eventually formed Blur , whose debut album Leisure was released in 1991 to mixed reviews .
After spending long periods of time touring the US , Albarn 's songwriting became increasingly influenced by British bands from the 1960s .
The result of these influences came in the form of Modern Life Is Rubbish -LRB- 1993 -RRB- , Parklife -LRB- 1994 -RRB- and The Great Escape -LRB- 1995 -RRB- .
All three albums received critical acclaim while Blur gained mass popularity in the UK , aided by a Britpop rivalry with Oasis .
Subsequent albums such as Blur -LRB- 1997 -RRB- , 13 -LRB- 1999 -RRB- , Think Tank -LRB- 2003 -RRB- and The Magic Whip -LRB- 2015 -RRB- contained influences from lo-fi , electronic and hip hop music .
Along with Tank Girl creator Jamie Hewlett , Albarn formed the `` virtual band '' Gorillaz in 1998 .
Drawing influences from alternative rock , trip hop , hip hop , electronica , dub , reggae and pop music , the band released their self-titled debut album in 2001 to worldwide success .
Although Albarn is the only permanent musical contributor , the albums feature collaborations from a wide range of artists .
Gorillaz are cited by the Guinness Book of World Records as the `` Most Successful Virtual Band '' .
Other projects include working with African musicians in aid of the charity Oxfam , writing and performing lead vocals on The Good , the Bad & the Queen as part of an unnamed supergroup and composing film soundtracks .
He has also ventured into the world of opera with Dr Dee and Monkey : Journey to the West .
His debut solo studio album Everyday Robots -- co-produced by XL Recordings CEO Richard Russell -- was released on 28 April 2014 and featured collaborations with Brian Eno , Natasha Khan and the Leytonstone City Pentecostal Mission Church Choir as well as sampling several rants by Lord Buckley .
In 2008 , The Daily Telegraph ranked Albarn number 18 in their list of the `` 100 most powerful people in British culture '' .
In a 2010 UK poll for Q magazine Albarn was voted the fourth-greatest frontman of all time .
He was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire -LRB- OBE -RRB- in the 2016 New Year Honours for services to music .