Danish -LSB- ˈdeɪnᵻʃ -RSB- -LRB- dansk -LSB- ˈd̥anˀsɡ̊ -RSB- ; dansk sprog , -LSB- ˈd̥anˀsɡ̊ ˈsb̥ʁɔʊ̯ˀ -RSB- -RRB- is a North Germanic language spoken by around six million people , principally in Denmark and in the region of Southern Schleswig in northern Germany , where it has minority language status .
There are also minor Danish-speaking communities in Norway , Sweden , Spain , the United States , Canada , Brazil and Argentina .
Due to immigration and language shift in urban areas , around 15 -- 20 % of the population of Greenland speak Danish as their home language .
Along with the other North Germanic languages , Danish is a descendant of Old Norse , the common language of the Germanic peoples that lived in Scandinavia during the Viking Era .
Danish , together with Swedish , derives from the East Norse dialect group , while the Middle Norwegian language before the influence of Danish and Norwegian Bokmål are classified as West Norse along with Faroese and Icelandic .
A more recent classification based on mutual intelligibility separates modern spoken Danish , Norwegian and Swedish as Mainland Scandinavian while Icelandic and Faroese are classified as Insular Scandinavian .
Until the 16th century , Danish was a continuum of dialects spoken from Schleswig to Scania with no standard variety or spelling conventions .
With the Protestant Reformation and the introduction of printing , a standard language was developed which was based on the educated Copenhagen dialect .
It spread through use in the education system and administration though German and Latin continued to be the most important written languages well into the 17th century .
Following the loss of territory to Germany and Sweden , a nationalist movement adopted the language as a token of Danish identity , and the language experienced a strong surge in use and popularity with major works of literature produced in the 18th and 19th centuries .
Today , traditional Danish dialects have all but disappeared , though there are regional variants of the standard language .
The main differences in language are between generations , with youth language being particularly innovative .
Danish has a very large vowel inventory comprising 27 phonemically distinctive vowels , and its prosody is characterized by the distinctive phenomenon stød , a kind of laryngeal phonation type .
Due to the many pronunciation differences that set apart Danish from its neighboring languages , particularly the vowels , difficult prosody and `` weakly '' pronounced consonants , it is sometimes considered to be a difficult language to learn and understand , and there is some evidence that small children are slower to acquire the phonological distinctions of Danish .
The grammar is moderately inflective with strong -LRB- irregular -RRB- and weak -LRB- regular -RRB- conjugations and inflections .
Nouns and demonstrative pronouns distinguish common and neutral gender .
As in English , Danish only has remnants of a former case system , particularly in the pronouns , and it has lost all person marking on verbs .
Its syntax is V2 , with the finite verb always occupying the second slot in the sentence .