David Robert Jones -LRB- 8 January 1947 -- 10 January 2016 -RRB- , known professionally as David Bowie -LRB- -LSB- ˈboʊi -RSB- -RRB- , was an English singer , songwriter and actor .
He was a figure in popular music for over five decades , becoming acclaimed by critics and other musicians for his innovative work .
His career was marked by reinvention and visual presentation , his music and stagecraft significantly influencing popular music .
During his lifetime , his record sales , estimated at 140 million worldwide , made him one of the world 's best-selling music artists .
In the UK , he was awarded nine platinum album certifications , eleven gold and eight silver , releasing eleven number-one albums .
In the US , he received five platinum and seven gold certifications .
He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996 .
Born in Brixton , South London , Bowie developed an interest in music as a child , eventually studying art , music and design before embarking on a professional career as a musician in 1963 .
`` Space Oddity '' became his first top-five entry on the UK Singles Chart after its release in July 1969 .
After a period of experimentation , he re-emerged in 1972 during the glam rock era with his flamboyant and androgynous alter ego Ziggy Stardust .
The character was spearheaded by the success of his single `` Starman '' and album The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars , which won him widespread popularity .
In 1975 , Bowie 's style shifted radically towards a sound he characterised as `` plastic soul '' , initially alienating many of his UK devotees but garnering him his first major US crossover success with the number-one single `` Fame '' and the album Young Americans .
In 1976 , Bowie starred in the cult film The Man Who Fell to Earth and released Station to Station .
The following year , he further confounded musical expectations with the electronic-inflected album Low -LRB- 1977 -RRB- , the first of three collaborations with Brian Eno that would come to be known as the `` Berlin Trilogy '' .
`` Heroes '' -LRB- 1977 -RRB- and Lodger -LRB- 1979 -RRB- followed ; each album reached the UK top five and received lasting critical praise .
After uneven commercial success in the late 1970s , Bowie had UK number ones with the 1980 single `` Ashes to Ashes '' , its parent album Scary Monsters and Super Creeps , and `` Under Pressure '' , a 1981 collaboration with Queen .
He then reached his commercial peak in 1983 with Let 's Dance , with its title track topping both UK and US charts .
Throughout the 1990s and 2000s , Bowie continued to experiment with musical styles , including industrial and jungle .
He also continued acting ; his roles included Major Celliers in Merry Christmas , Mr. Lawrence -LRB- 1983 -RRB- , the Goblin King Jareth in Labyrinth -LRB- 1986 -RRB- , Pontius Pilate in The Last Temptation of Christ -LRB- 1988 -RRB- , and Nikola Tesla in The Prestige -LRB- 2006 -RRB- , among other film and television appearances and cameos .
He stopped concert touring after 2004 , and his last live performance was at a charity event in 2006 .
In 2013 , Bowie returned from a decade-long recording hiatus with the release of The Next Day .
He remained musically active until he died of liver cancer two days after the release of his final album , Blackstar -LRB- 2016 -RRB- .