Deepika Padukone -LRB- -LSB- d̪iːpɪkaː pəɖʊkoːɳ -RSB- ; born 5 January 1986 -RRB- is an Indian film actress .
One of the highest-paid actresses in the world , Padukone is the recipient of several awards , including three Filmfare Awards .
She features in listings of the nation 's most popular and attractive personalities .
Padukone , the daughter of the badminton player Prakash Padukone , was born in Copenhagen and raised in Bangalore .
As a teenager , she played badminton in national level championships but left her career in the sport to become a fashion model .
She soon received offers for film roles and made her acting debut in 2006 as the title character of the Kannada film Aishwarya .
Padukone then played a dual role in her first Bollywood releasethe 2007 blockbuster Om Shanti Omand won a Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut .
Padukone received praise for portraying the lead roles in the romance Love Aaj Kal -LRB- 2009 -RRB- and the drama Lafangey Parindey -LRB- 2010 -RRB- , but her performances in the romance Bachna Ae Haseeno -LRB- 2008 -RRB- and the comedy Housefull -LRB- 2010 -RRB- were met with negative reviews .
The 2012 box office hit Cocktail marked a turning point in Padukone 's career , earning her praise and Best Actress nominations at several award ceremonies .
She rose to prominence with starring roles in the romantic comedies Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and Chennai Express -LRB- 2013 -RRB- , the heist comedy Happy New Year -LRB- 2014 -RRB- , and the historical romance Bajirao Mastani -LRB- 2015 -RRB- , all of which rank among the highest-grossing Bollywood films .
Padukone 's acclaimed portrayal of a character based on Juliet in the tragic romance Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and a headstrong architect in the comedy-drama Piku -LRB- 2015 -RRB- won her two Best Actress awards at Filmfare .
Her first project in Hollywood came with the action film xXx : Return of Xander Cage -LRB- 2017 -RRB- .
Alongside her acting career , Padukone participates in stage shows , has written columns for an Indian newspaper , is a prominent celebrity endorser for brands and products , and is vocal about issues such as feminism and depression .
She has designed her own line of clothing for women and is the founder of The Live Love Laugh Foundation , which creates awareness on mental health in India .