Demetria Devonne Lovato -LRB- -LSB- ˈdɛmi_loʊ-ˈvɑːtoʊ -RSB- or ; born August 20 , 1992 -RRB- is an American singer , songwriter , and actress .
After making her debut as a child actress in Barney & Friends , Lovato rose to prominence in 2008 when she starred in the Disney Channel television film Camp Rock and released her debut single `` This Is Me '' which peaked at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100 .
The success of the film and its soundtrack resulted in a recording contract with Hollywood Records .
Her debut album , Do n't Forget -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 .
The following year , Lovato was cast as the titular character of the television series Sonny with a Chance and she released her sophomore album , Here We Go Again , which became her first one to top the Billboard 200 chart .
After the release of additional television films and their soundtracks in 2010 , including Camp Rock 2 : The Final Jam , Lovato 's personal issues put her career on a hiatus and led to the discontinuation of Sonny with a Chance after a second season .
She entered a treatment center in November 2010 to seek help for addictions , an eating disorder , and self-harm .
While there , she was diagnosed with bipolar disorder .
Work on her third studio album , Unbroken -LRB- 2011 -RRB- , began after she successfully completed treatment .
The album addresses several of her difficulties .
Its lead single , `` Skyscraper '' , became Lovato 's second top 10 entry in the US , while its second single , `` Give Your Heart a Break '' , was certified triple platinum in the country .
Lovato was a judge and mentor on the American version of The X Factor in 2012 and 2013 .
Her third album , Demi -LRB- 2013 -RRB- , opened with first-week sales of 110,000 copies .
The lead single from her eponymous album , `` Heart Attack '' , became her third top 10 in the US and the album spawned three more singles .
While promoting the project , Lovato released a book titled Staying Strong : 365 Days a Year -LRB- 2013 -RRB- .
She also returned to acting as a recurring character in Glee , and released a memoir in 2014 .
Lovato 's fifth album , Confident -LRB- 2015 -RRB- , reached number two on the Billboard 200 .
Its lead single `` Cool for the Summer '' was eventually certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America .
All five of Lovato 's albums have received a gold certification in the US .
Musically , Lovato is considered a pop , pop rock , and R&B artist .
Lovato has received a considerable number of accolades , including an MTV Video Music Award , 13 Teen Choice Awards , five People 's Choice Awards , an ALMA Award , a Latin American Music Award and a Grammy Award nomination .
In 2013 , Maxim ranked her 26th on its Hot 100 list and Billboard ranked her second on its Social 50 Artists of the Year list .
Outside the entertainment industry , Lovato has been involved with several social and environmental causes since the launch of her career .
In May 2013 , she was cited for her dedication as a mentor to teens and young adults with mental health challenges at a National Children 's Mental Health Awareness Day hosted by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration in Washington , D.C. .
She has also become an advocate for the LGBT community , and women 's rights .
In 2014 , she was announced as the Grand Marshal for LA Pride week , and that same year she became the face for Human Rights Campaign 's Americans for Marriage Equality Campaign .
In April 2016 , Lovato was honored with the GLAAD Vanguard Award for making a significant difference in promoting equal rights for LGBT people .