The Democratic Republic of the Congo -LRB- -LSB- ˈkɒŋɡəʊ -RSB- -LSB- kɔ̃ɡo -RSB- ; République démocratique du Congo -RRB- , also known as DR Congo , DRC , DROC , Congo-Kinshasa or simply the Congo , is a country located in Central Africa .
The DRC borders the Central African Republic and South Sudan to the north ; Uganda , Rwanda , Burundi and Tanzania to the east ; Zambia and Angola to the south ; the Republic of the Congo to the west and the Atlantic Ocean to the southwest .
It is the second-largest country in Africa by area and eleventh largest in the world .
With a population of over 80 million , the Democratic Republic of the Congo is the most populated officially Francophone country , the fourth most-populated nation in Africa and the eighteenth most populated country in the world .
The territory of the DR Congo was first settled by humans around 90,000 years ago .
Bantu peoples began migrating into the region in the 5th century and again in the 10th century .
In the West of the region the Kingdom of Kongo ruled from the 14th to 19th centuries , while in the centre and East of the region the kingdoms of Luba and Lunda ruled from the 16th and 17th centuries to the 19th century .
In the 1870s , before the onset of the Scramble for Africa , European exploration of the Congo was carried out , first led by Sir Henry Morton Stanley under the sponsorship of King Leopold II of Belgium .
Leopold formally acquired rights to the Congo territory at the Conference of Berlin in 1885 and made the land his private property .
He named it the Congo Free State .
During the Free State the colonial military unit , the Force Publique , forced the local population into producing rubber , and from 1885 to 1908 millions of Congolese died as a consequence of disease and exploitation .
In 1908 Belgium , despite initial reluctance , formally annexed the Free State from Leopold , which became the Belgian Congo .
The Belgian Congo achieved independence on 30 June 1960 under the name Republic of the Congo -LRB- Léopoldville -RRB- .
Congolese nationalist Patrice Lumumba was elected the first Prime Minister , while Joseph Kasa-Vubu became the first President .
Conflict arose over the administration of the territory which became known as the Congo Crisis .
The provinces of Katanga , under Moïse Tshombe , and South Kasai attempted to secede from the Congo .
On 5 September 1960 , Kasa-Vubu dismissed Lumumba from office , encouraged by the United States and Belgium after Lumumba turned to the Soviet Union for assistance in the crisis .
On 14 September , with U.S. and Belgian support , Lumumba was arrested by forces loyal to Army Chief of Staff Joseph-Désiré Mobutu , who had gained de facto control over the country through a coup d'état the same day , and on 17 January 1961 Lumumba was handed over to Katangan authorities and executed by Belgian-led Katangese troops .
In 1965 Joseph-Désiré Mobutu , who later renamed himself Mobutu Sese Seko , officially came into power through a second coup .
In 1971 he renamed the country Zaire .
The country was run as a one-party state with his Popular Movement of the Revolution as the sole legal party .
Mobutu 's government received considerable support from the United States for its anti-communist stance during the Cold War .
By the early 1990s Mobutu 's government began to weaken .
Disenfranchisement of the eastern Congolese Tutsi population led to a 1996 invasion led by Tutsi-ruled Rwanda , which began the First Congo War .
On 17 May 1997 Laurent-Désiré Kabila , a leader of Tutsi forces from the province of South Kivu , became President , bringing about the end of Mobutu 's 32-year rule .
Tensions between President Kabila and the Rwandan and Tutsi presence in the country led to the Second Congo War from 1998 to 2003 .
Ultimately , nine African countries and around twenty armed groups became involved in the war , which resulted in the deaths of 5.4 million people .
The two wars together devastated the country .
President Laurent-Désiré Kabila was assassinated by one of his bodyguards on 16 January 2001 and was succeeded eight days later as President by his son Joseph Kabila .
The Democratic Republic of Congo is extremely rich in natural resources but has had political instability , a lack of infrastructure , issues with corruption and centuries of both commercial and colonial extraction and exploitation with little holistic development .
Besides the capital Kinshasa , the two next largest cities Lubumbashi and Mbuji-Mayi are both mining communities .
DR Congo 's largest export is raw minerals , with China accepting over 50 % of DRC 's exports in 2012 .
, according to the Human Development Index -LRB- HDI -RRB- , DR Congo 's level of human development ranks 176 out of 187 countries .