Destiny is an online-only multiplayer first-person shooter video game developed by Bungie and published by Activision .
It was released worldwide on September 9 , 2014 , for the PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , Xbox 360 , and Xbox One consoles .
Destiny marked Bungie 's first new console franchise since the Halo series , and it is the first game in a ten-year agreement between Bungie and Activision .
Set in a `` mythic science fiction '' world , the game features a multiplayer `` shared-world '' environment with elements of role-playing games .
Activities in Destiny are divided among player versus environment -LRB- PvE -RRB- and player versus player -LRB- PvP -RRB- game types .
In addition to normal story missions , PvE features three-player `` strikes '' and six-player raids .
A free roam patrol mode is also available for each planet and features public events .
PvP features objective-based modes , as well as traditional deathmatch game modes .
Players take on the role of a Guardian , protectors of Earth 's last safe city as they wield a power called Light to protect the City from different alien races .
Guardians are tasked with reviving a celestial being called the Traveler , while journeying to different planets to investigate and destroy the alien threats before humanity is completely wiped out .
Bungie released four expansion packs , furthering the story , and adding new content , missions , and new PvP modes .
Year One of Destiny featured two small expansions , The Dark Below in December 2014 and House of Wolves in May 2015 .
A third , larger expansion , The Taken King , was released in September 2015 and marked the beginning of Year Two , changing much of the core gameplay .
In December 2015 , Destiny shifted to an event-based model , featuring more limited-time events .
A new , large expansion called Rise of Iron was released in September 2016 , beginning Year Three .
Rise of Iron was only released for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One ; PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 clients subsequently stopped receiving updates .
A full sequel , Destiny 2 , is scheduled for September 2017 .
Upon its release , Destiny received mixed to positive reviews with criticism centered mostly around the game 's storyline and post-campaign content .
The game was praised for maintaining lineage from the Halo franchise , particularly in regards to its competitive experiences .
On day one of its release , it sold over US$ 500 million at retail , making it the biggest new franchise launch of all time .
It was GamesRadar 's 2014 Game of the Year and it received the BAFTA Award for Best Game at the 2014 British Academy Video Games Awards .