`` Diamonds '' is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her seventh studio album , Unapologetic -LRB- 2012 -RRB- .
It was written by Sia Furler together with its producers , Benny Blanco and StarGate .
The song premiered on September 26 , 2012 , during the Elvis Duran and the Morning Show and was digitally released the following day as the lead single from Unapologetic .
Def Jam Recordings serviced the single to contemporary hit radio in the United States on October 2 .
`` Diamonds '' is a mid-tempo pop , electronic and R&B ballad that features heavy synthesizers , orchestral sounds and electronic rhythms .
The song 's lyrics serve as a departure from the themes of unhealthy relationships that were on Rihanna 's previous singles and contain a prominent concept of love .
`` Diamonds '' topped music charts in over twenty countries , including the United States , where it became Rihanna 's twelfth number one single on the Billboard Hot 100 and tied her with Madonna and The Supremes for the fifth-most number one singles in the chart 's history .
`` Diamonds '' was certified quintuple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- and sold over 3.5 million digital copies in the country .
By May 2013 , it had sold over 7.5 million copies worldwide and became one of the best-selling singles of all-time .
The song 's music video was shot by director Anthony Mandler , a frequent collaborator of Rihanna 's , and depicts her in four environments that represent the elements of earth , air , water , and fire .
The video received positive reviews and was praised for its imagery .
Some critics believe that the heavily tattooed man intertwined with Rihanna 's arm in the video resembles Chris Brown .
The singer performed `` Diamonds '' on television shows such as Saturday Night Live and The X Factor and included it on the 777 , Diamonds , Monster Tour and the Anti World Tour set lists .
The American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers -LRB- ASCAP -RRB- recognized it as one of the most performed songs of 2013 and 2014 .
The official remix of `` Diamonds '' featured rapper Kanye West and was released on November 16 , 2012 .
The song has been covered by various recording artists , including Josef Salvat , who released his own cover of `` Diamonds '' as a single .