Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge -LRB- The Big-Hearted Will Take Away the Bride -RRB- , also known by the initialism DDLJ , is an Indian romance film written and directed by Aditya Chopra -LRB- In his directorial debut -RRB- and produced by his father Yash Chopra .
Released on 20 October 1995 , the film stars Shah Rukh Khan and Kajol .
The plot revolves around Raj and Simran , two young non-resident Indians , who fall in love during a vacation through Europe with their friends .
Raj tries to win over Simran 's family so the couple can marry , but Simran 's father has long since promised her hand to his friend 's son .
The film was shot in India , London and Switzerland , from September 1994 to August 1995 .
Earning 1.06 billion -LRB- valued at about US$ 32,766,000 in 1995 -RRB- in India and 160 million -LRB- valued at about US$ 4,946,000 in 1995 -RRB- overseas , Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge became the highest grossing Bollywood film of the year , and one of the most successful Indian films of all time .
It won 10 Filmfare Awards , the most for a single film at that time , and won the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment .
Its soundtrack album became one of the most popular of the 1990s .
Many critics praised the film , which connected with different segments of society by simultaneously promoting strong family values and the following of one 's own heart .
Its success led other film makers to target the non-resident Indian audience , which was deemed more lucrative for them .
It spawned many imitations of its story and style , and homages to specific scenes .
Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge was one of only three Hindi films in the reference book 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die , and was placed twelfth on the British Film Institute 's list of top Indian films of all time .
It is the longest-running film in the history of Indian cinema .
As of 2017 , over 20 years after its first release , it is still being shown at the Maratha Mandir theatre in Mumbai .