Dissociative identity disorder -LRB- DID -RRB- , also known as multiple personality disorder -LRB- MPD -RRB- , is a mental disorder characterized by at least two distinct and relatively enduring identities or dissociated personality states .
These states alternately show in a person 's behavior , accompanied by memory impairment for important information not explained by ordinary forgetfulness .
These symptoms are not accounted for by substance abuse , seizures , or other medical conditions , nor by imaginative play in children .
Dissociative symptoms range from common lapses in attention , becoming distracted by something else , and daydreaming , to pathological dissociative disorders .
Symptoms vary over time .
Dissociative disorders , including DID , have been attributed to disruptions in memory caused by trauma or other forms of stress .
Research on this hypothesis has been characterized by poor methodology .
An alternative hypothesis is that DID is a by-product of techniques employed by some therapists , especially those using hypnosis , and disagreement between the two positions is characterized by intense debate .
DID is one of the most controversial psychiatric disorders , with no clear consensus on diagnostic criteria or treatment .
No systematic , empirically supported definition of `` dissociation '' exists .
Diagnosis is often difficult , as the entity is frequently associated with other mental disorders .
Differential diagnosis should consider malingering if the individual 's principal concern is with financial or forensic gain or with the avoidance of obligations ; and factitious disorder , if the individual 's principal concern is with assuming a patient role .
It is generally believed that DID rarely resolves spontaneously .
In general , the prognosis is poor , especially for those with comorbid disorders .
There is little systematic data on rates of the condition .
It is believed to affect between 1 % and 3 % of the general population , and between 1 % and 5 % in inpatient groups in Europe and North America .
DID is diagnosed more frequently in North America than in the rest of the world , and is diagnosed three to nine times more often in females than in males .
Rates of diagnoses increased greatly in the latter half of the 20th century , along with the number of identities -LRB- often referred to as `` alters '' -RRB- claimed by people -LRB- increasing from an average of two or three to approximately 16 -RRB- .
DID is also controversial within the legal system , where it has been used as a rarely successful form of the insanity defense .
The 1990s showed a parallel increase in the number of court cases involving the diagnosis .
DID became a popular diagnosis in the 1970s , '80s , and '90s , but it is unclear whether the actual rate of the disorder increased , whether it was more recognized by health care providers , or whether sociocultural factors caused an increase in therapy-induced -LRB- iatrogenic -RRB- presentations .
The unusual number of diagnoses after 1980 , clustered around a small number of clinicians , and the suggestibility characteristic of those with DID , support the hypothesis that DID is therapist-induced .
The unusual clustering of diagnoses has also been explained as due to a lack of awareness and training among clinicians to recognize cases of DID .