Diwali or Deepavali is the Hindu festival of lights celebrated every year in autumn in the northern hemisphere -LRB- spring in southern hemisphere -RRB- .
It is an official holiday in Fiji , Guyana , India , Malaysia , Mauritius , Myanmar , Nepal , Singapore , Sri Lanka , Suriname , Trinidad and Tobago , and recently Sindh Province in Pakistan .
One of the most popular festivals of Hinduism , it spiritually signifies the victory of light over darkness , good over evil , knowledge over ignorance , and hope over despair .
Its celebration includes millions of lights shining on housetops , outside doors and windows , around temples and other buildings in the communities and countries where it is observed .
The festival preparations and rituals typically extend over a five-day period , but the main festival night of Diwali coincides with the darkest , new moon night of the Hindu Lunisolar month Kartika in Bikram Sambat calendar .
In the Gregorian calendar , Diwali night falls between mid-October and mid-November .
Before Diwali night , people clean , renovate , and decorate their homes and offices .
On Diwali night , people dress up in new clothes or their best outfit , light up diyas -LRB- lamps and candles -RRB- inside and outside their home , participate in family puja -LRB- prayers -RRB- typically to Lakshmi -- the goddess of fertility and prosperity .
After puja , fireworks follow , then a family feast including mithai -LRB- sweets -RRB- , and an exchange of gifts between family members and close friends .
Deepavali also marks a major shopping period in nations where it is celebrated .
The name of festive days as well as the rituals of Diwali vary significantly among Hindus , based on the region of India .
In many parts of India , the festivities start with Dhanteras -LRB- in Northern and Western part of India -RRB- , followed by Naraka Chaturdasi on second day , Deepavali on the third day , Diwali Padva dedicated to wife -- husband relationship on the fourth day , and festivities end with Bhai Dooj dedicated to sister -- brother bond on the fifth day .
Dhanteras usually falls eighteen days after Dussehra .
On the same night that Hindus celebrate Diwali , Jains celebrate a festival also called Diwali to mark the attainment of moksha by Mahavira , Sikhs celebrate Bandi Chhor Divas to mark the release of Guru Hargobind from a Mughal Empire prison , and Newar Buddhists , unlike the majority of Buddhists , celebrate Diwali by worshipping Lakshmi .