DNA is the debut studio album by British girl group Little Mix .
It was released on 19 November 2012 in the United Kingdom via Syco Music .
The group began work recording the album in December 2011 and concluded in September 2012 .
Throughout the recording process , Little Mix worked with several producers , including TMS , Future Cut , Steve Mac , Jarrad Rogers , Richard `` Biff '' Stannard , Ash Howes , Jon Levine , Xenomania , Fred Ball and Pegasus .
The album was co-written by Little Mix and they stated that they were involved in the development of the album as much as possible .
Sonically , the album is primarily a mixture of pop and R&B records , with influences from dance-pop , pop rock and hip hop found on specific songs as well .
The album 's lyrical content explores empowerment , relationships and heartbreak .
Songs on the album were also co-written by members of other girl groups , including Nicola Roberts of Girls Aloud , Shaznay Lewis of All Saints and T-Boz of TLC .
DNA received mixed reviews from music critics .
The album 's lead single , `` Wings '' , was released on 26 August 2012 , reaching number one in UK and Ireland as well as charting in Australia , New Zealand , Slovakia , Czech Republic , Hungary , Belgium , Canada and the US .
The second single , `` DNA '' , was released on 11 November 2012 , peaking at number three in the UK .
Two post-album singles were released : `` Change Your Life '' on 3 February 2013 , and a remix of `` How Ya Doin ' ? ''
featuring American rapper Missy Elliott was released on 17 April 2013 ; both songs reached the top 20 in the UK .
The album charted in the top 5 in eight countries , including number three in the UK , and at number four on the US Billboard 200 ; making Little Mix the first girl group since Danity Kane in 2006 to reach the top 5 with their debut album , as well as earning the highest debut Billboard chart position by a British girl group , breaking the record previously held by the Spice Girls ' debut album Spice -LRB- 1996 -RRB- .