Doctor Who is a British science-fiction television programme produced by the BBC since 1963 .
The programme depicts the adventures of a Time Lord called `` The Doctor '' , an extraterrestrial being from the planet Gallifrey .
He explores the universe in a time-travelling space ship called the TARDIS .
Its exterior appears as a blue British police box , which was a common sight in Britain in 1963 when the series first aired .
Accompanied by a number of companions , the Doctor combats a variety of foes , while working to save civilisations and help people in need .
The show is a significant part of British popular culture , and elsewhere it has gained a cult following .
It has influenced generations of British television professionals , many of whom grew up watching the series .
The programme originally ran from 1963 to 1989 .
There was an unsuccessful attempt to revive regular production in 1996 with a backdoor pilot , in the form of a television film titled Doctor Who .
The programme was relaunched in 2005 , and since then has been produced in-house by BBC Wales in Cardiff .
Doctor Who has also spawned numerous spin-offs , including comic books , films , novels , audio dramas , and the television series Torchwood -LRB- 2006 -- 2011 -RRB- , The Sarah Jane Adventures -LRB- 2007 -- 2011 -RRB- , K-9 -LRB- 2009 -- 2010 -RRB- , and Class '' -LRB- 2016-present -RRB- , and has been the subject of many parodies and references in popular culture .
Twelve actors have headlined the series as the Doctor .
The transition from one actor to another is written into the plot of the show with the concept of regeneration into a new incarnation -- an idea introduced in 1966 to allow the show to continue after the departure of original lead William Hartnell who was becoming very ill at the time .
The concept is that this is a Time Lord trait through which the character of the Doctor takes on a new body and personality to recover from a severe injury or anything that would otherwise kill a normal person .
Each actor 's portrayal differs , but all represent stages in the life of the same character and form a single narrative .
The time-travelling feature of the plot means that different incarnations of the Doctor occasionally meet .
The current lead , Peter Capaldi , took on the role after Matt Smith 's exit in the 2013 Christmas special `` The Time of the Doctor '' .
In 2017 , Capaldi confirmed he would be leaving at the end of the tenth series , with his final appearance being the 2017 Christmas Special .