The dodo -LRB- Raphus cucullatus -RRB- is an extinct flightless bird that was endemic to the island of Mauritius , east of Madagascar in the Indian Ocean .
The dodo 's closest genetic relative was the also extinct Rodrigues solitaire , the two forming the subfamily Raphinae of the family of pigeons and doves .
The closest living relative of the dodo is the Nicobar pigeon .
A white dodo was once thought to have existed on the nearby island of Réunion , but this is now thought to have been confusion based on the Réunion ibis and paintings of white dodos .
Subfossil remains show the dodo was about 1 m tall and may have weighed 10.6 - .
The dodo 's appearance in life is evidenced only by drawings , paintings , and written accounts from the 17th century .
Because these vary considerably , and because only some illustrations are known to have been drawn from live specimens , its exact appearance in life remains unresolved , and little is known about its behaviour .
Though the dodo has historically been considered fat and clumsy , it is now thought to have been well-adapted for its ecosystem .
It has been depicted with brownish-grey plumage , yellow feet , a tuft of tail feathers , a grey , naked head , and a black , yellow , and green beak .
It used gizzard stones to help digest its food , which is thought to have included fruits , and its main habitat is believed to have been the woods in the drier coastal areas of Mauritius .
One account states its clutch consisted of a single egg .
It is presumed that the dodo became flightless because of the ready availability of abundant food sources and a relative absence of predators on Mauritius .
The first recorded mention of the dodo was by Dutch sailors in 1598 .
In the following years , the bird was hunted by sailors and invasive species , while its habitat was being destroyed .
The last widely accepted sighting of a dodo was in 1662 .
Its extinction was not immediately noticed , and some considered it to be a mythical creature .
In the 19th century , research was conducted on a small quantity of remains of four specimens that had been brought to Europe in the early 17th century .
Among these is a dried head , the only soft tissue of the dodo that remains today .
Since then , a large amount of subfossil material has been collected on Mauritius , mostly from the Mare aux Songes swamp .
The extinction of the dodo within less than a century of its discovery called attention to the previously unrecognised problem of human involvement in the disappearance of entire species .
The dodo achieved widespread recognition from its role in the story of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , and it has since become a fixture in popular culture , often as a symbol of extinction and obsolescence .