Dolly Rebecca Parton Dean -LRB- born January 19 , 1946 -RRB- , professionally known as Dolly Parton , is an American singer , songwriter , multi-instrumentalist , record producer , actress , author , businesswoman , and philanthropist , known primarily for her work in country music .
After achieving success as a songwriter for others , Dolly Parton made her album debut in 1967 , with her album Hello , I 'm Dolly .
With steady success during the remainder of the 1960s -LRB- both as a solo artist and with a series of duet albums with Porter Wagoner -RRB- , her sales and chart peak came during the 1970s and continuing into the 1980s ; Parton 's subsequent albums in the later part of the 1990s were lower in sales .
However , in the new millennium , Parton achieved commercial success again and has released albums on independent labels since 2000 , including albums on her own label , Dolly Records .
Parton is the most honored female country performer of all time .
Achieving 25 Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- certified Gold , Platinum , and Multi-Platinum awards , she has had 25 songs reach No. 1 on the Billboard country music charts , a record for a female artist -LRB- tied with Reba McEntire -RRB- .
She has 41 career top 10 country albums , a record for any artist , and she has 110 career charted singles over the past 40 years .
All-inclusive sales of singles , albums , hits collections , and digital downloads during her career have topped 100 million worldwide .
She has garnered nine Grammy Awards , two Academy Award nominations , ten Country Music Association Awards , seven Academy of Country Music Awards , three American Music Awards , and is one of only seven female artists to win the Country Music Association 's Entertainer of the Year Award .
Parton has received 47 Grammy nominations .
In 1999 , Parton was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame .
She has composed over 3,000 songs , notably `` I Will Always Love You '' -LRB- a two-time U.S. country chart-topper for Parton , as well as an international pop hit for Whitney Houston -RRB- , `` Jolene '' , `` Coat of Many Colors '' , and `` 9 to 5 '' .
She is also one of the few to have received at least one nomination from the Academy Awards , Grammy Awards , Tony Awards , and Emmy Awards .
As an actress , she starred in films such as 9 to 5 , The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas , Rhinestone , and Steel Magnolias .