Sir Donald George `` Don '' Bradman , AC -LRB- 27 August 1908 -- 25 February 2001 -RRB- , often referred to as `` The Don '' , was an Australian cricketer , widely acknowledged as the greatest batsman of all time .
Bradman 's career Test batting average of 99.94 is often cited as the greatest achievement by any sportsman in any major sport .
The story that the young Bradman practised alone with a cricket stump and a golf ball is part of Australian folklore .
Bradman 's meteoric rise from bush cricket to the Australian Test team took just over two years .
Before his 22nd birthday , he had set many records for top scoring , some of which still stand , and became Australia 's sporting idol at the height of the Great Depression .
During a 20-year playing career , Bradman consistently scored at a level that made him , in the words of former Australia captain Bill Woodfull , `` worth three batsmen to Australia '' .
A controversial set of tactics , known as Bodyline , was specifically devised by the England team to curb his scoring .
As a captain and administrator , Bradman was committed to attacking , entertaining cricket ; he drew spectators in record numbers .
He hated the constant adulation , however , and it affected how he dealt with others .
The focus of attention on his individual performances strained relationships with some team-mates , administrators and journalists , who thought him aloof and wary .
Following an enforced hiatus due to the Second World War , he made a dramatic comeback , captaining an Australian team known as `` The Invincibles '' on a record-breaking unbeaten tour of England .
A complex , highly driven man , not given to close personal relationships ,
Bradman retained a pre-eminent position in the game by acting as an administrator , selector and writer for three decades following his retirement .
Even after he became reclusive in his declining years his opinion was highly sought , and his status as a national icon was still recognised -- more than 50 years after his retirement as a Test player , in 2001 , Prime Minister John Howard of Australia called him the `` greatest living Australian '' .
Bradman 's image has appeared on postage stamps and coins , and a museum dedicated to his life was opened while he was still living .
On the centenary of his birth , 27 August 2008 , the Royal Australian Mint issued a $ 5 commemorative gold coin with Bradman 's image .
In 2009 , he was inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame .