Donald Duck is a cartoon character created in 1934 at Walt Disney Productions .
Donald is an anthropomorphic white duck with a yellow-orange bill , legs , and feet .
He typically wears a sailor shirt and cap with a bow tie .
Donald is most famous for his semi-intelligible speech and his mischievous and temperamental personality .
Along with his friend Mickey Mouse , Donald is one of the most popular Disney characters and was included in TV Guide 's list of the 50 greatest cartoon characters of all time in 2002 .
He has appeared in more films than any other Disney character , and is the most published comic book character in the world outside of the superhero genre .
Donald Duck rose to fame with his comedic roles in animated cartoons .
Donald 's first appearance was in 1934 in The Wise Little Hen , but it was his second appearance in Orphan 's Benefit which introduced him as a temperamental comic foil to Mickey Mouse .
Throughout the next two decades , Donald appeared in over 150 theatrical films , several of which were recognized at the Academy Awards .
In the 1930s , he typically appeared as part of a comic trio with Mickey and Goofy and was given his own film series in 1937 starting with Don Donald .
These films introduced Donald 's love interest Daisy Duck and often included his three nephews Huey , Dewey , and Louie .
After the 1956 film Chips Ahoy , Donald appeared primarily in educational films before eventually returning to theatrical animation in Mickey 's Christmas Carol -LRB- 1983 -RRB- .
His most recent appearance in a theatrical film was 1999 's Fantasia 2000 .
Donald has also appeared in direct-to-video features such as Mickey , Donald , Goofy : The Three Musketeers -LRB- 2004 -RRB- , television series such as Mickey Mouse Clubhouse -LRB- 2006 -- 2016 -RRB- , and video games such as QuackShot -LRB- 1991 -RRB- .
Beyond animation , Donald is primarily known for his appearances in comics .
Donald was most famously drawn by Al Taliaferro , Carl Barks , and Don Rosa .
Barks , in particular , is credited for greatly expanding the `` Donald Duck universe '' , the world in which Donald lives , and creating many additional characters such as Donald 's rich uncle Scrooge McDuck .
Donald has been a very popular character in Europe , particularly in Nordic countries where his weekly magazine Donald Duck & Co was the most popular comics publication from the 1950s to 2009 .
Disney comics ' fandom is sometimes referred to as `` Donaldism '' , a term which originated in Norway -LRB- Donaldisme -RRB- .