Dopamine -LRB- DA , contracted from 3,4-dihydroxyphenethylamine -RRB- is an organic chemical of the catecholamine and phenethylamine families that plays several important roles in the brain and body .
It is an amine synthesized by removing a carboxyl group from a molecule of its precursor chemical L-DOPA , which is synthesized in the brain and kidneys .
Dopamine is also synthesized in plants and most animals .
In the brain , dopamine functions as a neurotransmitter -- a chemical released by neurons -LRB- nerve cells -RRB- to send signals to other nerve cells .
The brain includes several distinct dopamine pathways , one of which plays a major role in reward-motivated behavior .
Most types of rewards increase the level of dopamine in the brain , and many addictive drugs increase dopamine neuronal activity .
Other brain dopamine pathways are involved in motor control and in controlling the release of various hormones .
These pathways and cell groups form a dopamine system which is neuromodulatory .
Outside the central nervous system , dopamine functions primarily as a local chemical messenger .
In blood vessels , it inhibits norepinephrine release and acts as a vasodilator -LRB- at normal concentrations -RRB- ; in the kidneys , it increases sodium excretion and urine output ; in the pancreas , it reduces insulin production ; in the digestive system , it reduces gastrointestinal motility and protects intestinal mucosa ; and in the immune system , it reduces the activity of lymphocytes .
With the exception of the blood vessels , dopamine in each of these peripheral systems is synthesized locally and exerts its effects near the cells that release it .
Several important diseases of the nervous system are associated with dysfunctions of the dopamine system , and some of the key medications used to treat them work by altering the effects of dopamine .
Parkinson 's disease , a degenerative condition causing tremor and motor impairment , is caused by a loss of dopamine-secreting neurons in an area of the midbrain called the substantia nigra .
Its metabolic precursor L-DOPA can be manufactured , and in its pure form marketed as Levodopa is the most widely used treatment for the condition .
There is evidence that schizophrenia involves altered levels of dopamine activity , and most antipsychotic drugs used to treat this are dopamine antagonists which reduce dopamine activity .
Similar dopamine antagonist drugs are also some of the most effective anti-nausea agents .
Restless legs syndrome and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder -LRB- ADHD -RRB- are associated with decreased dopamine activity .
Dopaminergic stimulants can be addictive in high doses , but some are used at lower doses to treat ADHD .
Dopamine itself is available as a manufactured medication for intravenous injection : although it can not reach the brain from the bloodstream , its peripheral effects make it useful in the treatment of heart failure or shock , especially in newborn babies .