Down syndrome -LRB- DS or DNS -RRB- , also known as trisomy 21 , is a genetic disorder caused by the presence of all or part of a third copy of chromosome 21 .
It is typically associated with physical growth delays , characteristic facial features and mild to moderate intellectual disability .
The average IQ of a young adult with Down syndrome is 50 , equivalent to the mental ability of an 8 - or 9-year-old child , but this can vary widely .
The parents of the affected individual are typically genetically normal .
The extra chromosome occurs by chance .
The possibility increases from less than 0.1 % in 20-year-old mothers to 3 % in those age 45 .
There is no known behavioral activity or environmental factor that changes the possibility .
Down syndrome can be identified during pregnancy by prenatal screening followed by diagnostic testing or after birth by direct observation and genetic testing .
Since the introduction of screening , pregnancies with the diagnosis are often terminated .
Regular screening for health problems common in Down syndrome is recommended throughout the person 's life .
There is no cure for Down syndrome .
Education and proper care have been shown to improve quality of life .
Some children with Down syndrome are educated in typical school classes , while others require more specialized education .
Some individuals with Down syndrome graduate from high school and a few attend post-secondary education .
In adulthood , about 20 % in the United States do paid work in some capacity with many requiring a sheltered work environment .
Support in financial and legal matters is often needed .
Life expectancy is around 50 to 60 years in the developed world with proper health care .
Down syndrome is one of the most common chromosome abnormalities in humans .
It occurs in about one per 1000 babies born each year .
In 2015 , Down syndrome was present in 5.4 million individuals and resulted in 27,000 deaths down from 43,000 deaths in 1990 .
It is named after John Langdon Down , the British doctor who fully described the syndrome in 1866 .
Some aspects of the condition were described earlier by Jean-Étienne Dominique Esquirol in 1838 and Édouard Séguin in 1844 .
In 1957 , the genetic cause of Down syndrome , an extra copy of chromosome 21 , was discovered .