Earl Eugene Scruggs -LRB- January 6 , 1924 -- March 28 , 2012 -RRB- was an American musician noted for popularizing a three-finger banjo picking style , now called `` Scruggs style '' , that is a defining characteristic of bluegrass music .
His three-finger style of playing was radically different from the ways the five-string banjo had been historically played .
He popularized the instrument in several genres of music and elevated the banjo from its role as a background rhythm instrument , or a comedian 's prop , into featured solo status .
Scruggs ' career began at age 21 when he was hired to play in a group called `` Bill Monroe and the Blue Grass Boys '' .
The name `` bluegrass '' stuck and eventually became the eponym for this entire genre of county music .
Despite considerable success with Monroe , performing on the Grand Ole Opry and recording classic hits like `` Blue Moon of Kentucky '' , Scruggs gave notice in 1946 that he was quitting the band because of the exhausting touring schedule .
Band member Lester Flatt resigned as well , and Flatt and Scruggs later paired up in a new group they called `` Flatt and Scruggs and the Foggy Mountain Boys '' .
Scruggs ' banjo instrumental called `` Foggy Mountain Breakdown '' , released in 1949 , became an enduring hit , and had a rebirth of popularity to a younger generation when it was featured in the 1967 film Bonnie and Clyde .
The song won two Grammy Awards and in 2005 was selected for the Library of Congress ' National Recording Registry of works of unusual merit .
Flatt and Scruggs brought bluegrass music into mainstream popularity in the early 1960s with their country hit , `` The Ballad of Jed Clampett '' .
This song was the theme music for the successful network television sitcom The Beverly Hillbillies and was the first bluegrass recording to reach number one on the Billboard charts .
Over their 20-year association , Flatt and Scruggs recorded over 50 albums and 75 single records .
The duo broke up in 1969 , chiefly because Scruggs wanted to progress the music to a more modern sound and Flatt was a traditionalist who did not want to change the style because he thought it would alienate a fan base of bluegrass purists .
Each of them formed a new band that matched his own vision , but neither of them ever regained the success they achieved as a team .
Scruggs received four Grammy awards , a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and a National Medal of Arts .
He became a member of the International Bluegrass Music Hall of Fame and was given a star on the Hollywood walk of fame .
In 1985 , Flatt and Scruggs were inducted together into the Country Music Hall of Fame and named number 24 as a duo on CMT 's 40 Greatest Men of Country Music .
Scruggs was awarded a National Heritage Fellowship by the National Endowment for the Arts ; the highest honor in the folk and traditional arts in the US .
Four works by Scruggs have been placed in the Grammy Hall of Fame .
After Scruggs ' death in 2012 at age 88 , the Earl Scruggs Center was founded near his birthplace in Shelby , North Carolina , with the aid of a federal grant and corporate donors .
The center is a $ 5.5 million facility which features the musical contributions of Scruggs and serves as an educational center providing classes and field trips for students .