Ecuador -LRB- -LSB- ˈɛkwədɔːr -RSB- , -LSB- ekwaˈðor -RSB- -RRB- -LRB- Ikwadur -RRB- , officially the Republic of Ecuador -LRB- -LSB- República del Ecuador , -RSB- , which literally translates as `` Republic of the Equator '' ; Ikwadur Ripuwlika -RRB- , is a representative democratic republic in northwestern South America , bordered by Colombia on the north , Peru on the east and south , and the Pacific Ocean to the west .
Ecuador also includes the Galápagos Islands in the Pacific , about 1000 km west of the mainland .
What is now Ecuador was home to a variety of Amerindian groups that were gradually incorporated into the Inca Empire during the 15th century .
The territory was colonized by Spain during the 16th century , achieving independence in 1820 as part of Gran Colombia , from which it emerged as its own sovereign state in 1830 .
The legacy of both empires is reflected in Ecuador 's ethnically diverse population , with most of its 15.2 million people being mestizos , followed by large minorities of European , Amerindian , and African descendants .
Spanish is the official language and is spoken by a majority of the population , though 13 Amerindian languages are also recognized , including Quichua and Shuar .
The capital city is Quito , while the largest city is Guayaquil .
In reflection of the country 's rich cultural heritage , the historical center of Quito was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1978 .
Cuenca , the third-largest city , was also declared a World Heritage Site in 1999 as an outstanding example of a planned , inland Spanish-style colonial city in the Americas .
Ecuador has a developing economy that is highly dependent on commodities , namely petroleum and agricultural products .
The country is classified as a medium-income country .
Ecuador is a democratic presidential republic .
The new constitution of 2008 is the first in the world to recognize legally enforceable Rights of Nature , or ecosystem rights .
Ecuador is also known for its rich ecology , hosting many endemic plants and animals , such as those of the Galápagos Islands .
It is one of 17 megadiverse countries in the world .