Edge of Tomorrow -LRB- alternatively known by its tagline Live .
Die .
Repeat .
and marketed as such on home release -RRB- is a 2014 American military science fiction film starring Tom Cruise and Emily Blunt .
Doug Liman directed the film based on a screenplay adapted from the 2004 Japanese light novel All You Need Is Kill by Hiroshi Sakurazaka .
The film begins with a flashback to the year 2015 , when a horde of aliens called the Mimics arrived in Germany on a meteorite .
By the year 2020 , in which the film 's action takes place , the horde has spread over most of continental Europe and killed all humans in its way .
Cruise plays William Cage , a public relations officer with no combat experience , who is ordered by his superior to film the first wave of a crucial landing operation against the aliens .
Upon being killed in combat , Cage finds himself in a time loop that sends him back to the day preceding the battle every time he dies .
Cage teams up with Special Forces warrior Rita Vrataski -LRB- Blunt -RRB- in seeking a way to defeat the extraterrestrials .
In late 2009 , Productions purchased the rights to the novel and sold a spec script to the American studio Warner Bros. .
The studio produced the film with the involvement of , the novel 's publisher Viz Media , and Australian production company Village Roadshow .
Filming began in late 2012 , taking place in England at Leavesden Studios outside London , and other locations such as Trafalgar Square and Saunton Sands .
Nine companies handled the visual effects .
The film was released in cinemas on the weekend of , 2014 in 28 territories , including the United Kingdom , Brazil , Germany , Spain , and Indonesia .
On the weekend of , 2014 it was released in 36 additional territories , including North America -LRB- United States and Canada -RRB- , Australia , China , and Russia .
The film grossed over in theaters worldwide and received positive reviews from critics .
A sequel , titled Live Die Repeat and Repeat , is currently in development .