Edward I -LRB- 17/18 June 1239 -- 7 July 1307 -RRB- , also known as Edward Longshanks and the Hammer of the Scots -LRB- Malleus Scotorum -RRB- , was King of England from 1272 to 1307 .
He spent much of his reign reforming royal administration and common law .
Through an extensive legal inquiry , Edward investigated the tenure of various feudal liberties , while the law was reformed through a series of statutes regulating criminal and property law .
Increasingly , however , Edward 's attention was drawn towards military affairs .
The first son of Henry III , Edward was involved early in the political intrigues of his father 's reign , which included an outright rebellion by the English barons .
In 1259 , he briefly sided with a baronial reform movement , supporting the Provisions of Oxford .
After reconciliation with his father , however , he remained loyal throughout the subsequent armed conflict , known as the Second Barons ' War .
After the Battle of Lewes , Edward was hostage to the rebellious barons , but escaped after a few months and joined the fight against Simon de Montfort .
Montfort was defeated at the Battle of Evesham in 1265 , and within two years the rebellion was extinguished .
With England pacified , Edward joined the Ninth Crusade to the Holy Land .
The crusade accomplished little , and Edward was on his way home in 1272 when he was informed that his father had died .
Making a slow return , he reached England in 1274 and was crowned at Westminster on 19 August .
After suppressing a minor rebellion in Wales in 1276 -- 77 , Edward responded to a second rebellion in 1282 -- 83 with a full-scale war of conquest .
After a successful campaign , Edward subjected Wales to English rule , built a series of castles and towns in the countryside and settled them with English people .
Next , his efforts were directed towards Scotland .
Initially invited to arbitrate a succession dispute , Edward claimed feudal suzerainty over the kingdom .
In the war that followed , the Scots persevered , even though the English seemed victorious at several points .
At the same time there were problems at home .
In the mid-1290s , extensive military campaigns required high levels of taxation , and Edward met with both lay and ecclesiastical opposition .
These crises were initially averted , but issues remained unsettled .
When the King died in 1307 , he left to his son , Edward II , an ongoing war with Scotland and many financial and political problems .
Edward I was a tall man for his era , hence the nickname `` Longshanks '' .
He was temperamental , and this , along with his height , made him an intimidating man , and he often instilled fear in his contemporaries .
Nevertheless , he held the respect of his subjects for the way he embodied the medieval ideal of kingship , as a soldier , an administrator and a man of faith .
Modern historians are divided on their assessment of Edward I : while some have praised him for his contribution to the law and administration , others have criticised him for his uncompromising attitude towards his nobility .
Currently , Edward I is credited with many accomplishments during his reign , including restoring royal authority after the reign of Henry III , establishing Parliament as a permanent institution and thereby also a functional system for raising taxes , and reforming the law through statutes .
At the same time , he is also often criticised for other actions , such as his brutal conduct towards the Scots , and issuing the Edict of Expulsion in 1290 , by which the Jews were expelled from England .
The Edict remained in effect for the rest of the Middle Ages , and it was over 350 years until it was formally overturned under Oliver Cromwell in 1656 .