Egypt -LRB- -LSB- ˈiːdʒɪpt -RSB- ; مِصر , مَصر , Kimi -RRB- , officially the Arab Republic of Egypt , is a transcontinental country spanning the northeast corner of Africa and southwest corner of Asia by a land bridge formed by the Sinai Peninsula .
Egypt is a Mediterranean country bordered by the Gaza Strip and Israel to the northeast , the Gulf of Aqaba to the east , the Red Sea to the east and south , Sudan to the south , and Libya to the west .
Across the Gulf of Aqaba lies Jordan , and across from the Sinai Peninsula lies Saudi Arabia , although Jordan and Saudi Arabia do not share a land border with Egypt .
Egypt has one of the longest histories of any modern country , emerging as one of the world 's first nation states in the tenth millennium BC .
Considered a cradle of civilisation , Ancient Egypt experienced some of the earliest developments of writing , agriculture , urbanisation , organised religion and central government .
Iconic monuments such as the Giza Necropolis and its Great Sphinx , as well the ruins of Memphis , Thebes , Karnak , and the Valley of the Kings , reflect this legacy and remain a significant focus of archaeological study and popular interest worldwide .
Egypt 's rich cultural heritage is an integral part of its national identity , which has endured , and at times assimilated , various foreign influences , including Greek , Persian , Roman , Arab , Ottoman , and European .
One of the earliest centres of Christianity , Egypt was Islamised in the seventh century and remains a predominantly Muslim country , albeit with a significant Christian minority .
With over 92 million inhabitants , Egypt is the most populous country in North Africa and the Arab world , the third-most populous in Africa -LRB- after Nigeria and Ethiopia -RRB- , and the fifteenth-most populous in the world .
The great majority of its people live near the banks of the Nile River , an area of about 40000 km2 , where the only arable land is found .
The large regions of the Sahara desert , which constitute most of Egypt 's territory , are sparsely inhabited .
About half of Egypt 's residents live in urban areas , with most spread across the densely populated centres of greater Cairo , Alexandria and other major cities in the Nile Delta .
Modern Egypt is considered to be a regional and middle power , with significant cultural , political , and military influence in North Africa , the Middle East and the Muslim world .
Egypt 's economy is one of the largest and most diversified in the Middle East , and is projected to become one of the largest in the 21st century .
Egypt is a member of the United Nations , Non-Aligned Movement , Arab League , African Union , and Organisation of Islamic Cooperation .