Emily Olivia Leah Blunt -LRB- born 23 February 1983 -RRB- is a British film and stage actress .
Blunt made her professional debut in a 2001 London production of the play The Royal Family .
Two years later , she appeared on screen for the first time in the 2003 television film Boudica -LRB- Warrior Queen -RRB- .
Her performance in the 2004 drama film My Summer of Love garnered her the Evening Standard British Film Award for Most Promising Newcomer .
For her performance in the TV film Gideon 's Daughter -LRB- 2006 -RRB- she received a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress .
The same year , she received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress -- Motion Picture and a nomination for a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for The Devil Wears Prada .
In 2009 , Blunt received the BAFTA Britannia Award for British Artist of the Year .
She received more acclaim for portraying Queen Victoria in The Young Victoria -LRB- 2009 -RRB- , receiving a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture -- Drama .
2009 also saw Blunt appear in the crime caper comedy Wild Target with Bill Nighy and Rupert Grint .
She found commercial success for roles in the romantic science-fiction thriller The Adjustment Bureau -LRB- 2011 -RRB- , the science-fiction action thriller Looper -LRB- 2012 -RRB- , and the science-fiction military film Edge of Tomorrow -LRB- 2014 -RRB- .
Blunt received her fourth and fifth Golden Globe Award nominations for her roles in the romantic comedy-drama Salmon Fishing in the Yemen -LRB- 2012 -RRB- and the musical fantasy Into the Woods -LRB- 2014 -RRB- in the Best Actress -- Motion Picture Comedy or Musical category .
In 2016 , Blunt starred in the fantasy-action film The Huntsman : Winter 's War and The Girl on the Train , the latter based on the international best-selling novel of the same name , and a performance that earned her nominations for the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role .