Joshua Abraham Norton -LRB- 1818 -- January 8 , 1880 -RRB- , known as Emperor Norton , was a citizen of San Francisco , California , who in 1859 proclaimed himself `` Norton I , Emperor of the United States '' and subsequently `` Protector of Mexico '' .
Born in England , Norton spent most of his early life in South Africa .
After the death of his mother in 1846 and his father in 1848 , he sailed west , arriving in San Francisco possibly in November 1849 .
Norton initially made a living as a businessman , but he lost his fortune investing in Peruvian rice .
After losing a lawsuit in which he tried to void his rice contract , Norton 's public prominence faded .
He reemerged in September 1859 , laying claim to the position of Emperor of the United States .
Although he had no political power , and his influence extended only so far as he was humored by those around him , he was treated deferentially in San Francisco , and currency issued in his name was honored in the establishments he frequented .
Though some considered him insane or eccentric , citizens of San Francisco celebrated his regal presence and his proclamations , such as his order that the United States Congress be dissolved by force and his numerous decrees calling for a bridge crossing connecting San Francisco to Oakland , and a corresponding tunnel to be built under San Francisco Bay .
Long after his death , similar structures were built in the form of the San Francisco -- Oakland Bay Bridge and the Transbay Tube , and there have been campaigns to rename the bridge `` The Emperor Norton Bridge '' .
On January 8 , 1880 , Norton collapsed at the corner of California and Dupont -LRB- now Grant -RRB- streets and died before he could be given medical treatment .
At his funeral two days later , nearly 30,000 people packed the streets of San Francisco to pay homage .
Norton has been immortalized as the basis of characters in the literature of writers Mark Twain , Robert Louis Stevenson , Christopher Moore , Morris and Goscinny , Selma Lagerlöf , and Neil Gaiman .