Empress Matilda -LRB- c. 7 February 110210 September 1167 -RRB- , also known as the Empress Maude , was the claimant to the English throne during the civil war known as the Anarchy .
The daughter of King Henry I of England , she moved to Germany as a child when she married the future Holy Roman Emperor Henry V .
She travelled with her husband into Italy in 1116 , was controversially crowned in St. Peter 's Basilica , and acted as the imperial regent in Italy .
Matilda and Henry had no children , and when Henry died in 1125 , the crown was claimed by Lothair II , one of his political enemies .
Meanwhile , Matilda 's younger brother , William Adelin , died in the White Ship disaster of 1120 , leaving England facing a potential succession crisis .
On Henry V 's death , Matilda was recalled to Normandy by her father , who arranged for her to marry Geoffrey of Anjou to form an alliance to protect his southern borders .
Henry I had no further legitimate children and nominated Matilda as his heir , making his court swear an oath of loyalty to her and her successors , but the decision was not popular in the Anglo-Norman court .
Henry died in 1135 but Matilda and Geoffrey faced opposition from the Norman barons and were unable to pursue their claims .
The throne was instead taken by Matilda 's cousin Stephen of Blois , who enjoyed the backing of the English Church .
Stephen took steps to solidify his new regime , but faced threats both from neighbouring powers and from opponents within his kingdom .
In 1139 Matilda crossed to England to take the kingdom by force , supported by her half-brother , Robert of Gloucester , and her uncle , King David I of Scotland , while Geoffrey focused on conquering Normandy .
Matilda 's forces captured Stephen at the Battle of Lincoln in 1141 , but the Empress 's attempt to be crowned at Westminster collapsed in the face of bitter opposition from the London crowds .
As a result of this retreat , Matilda was never formally declared Queen of England , and was instead titled the Lady of the English .
Robert was captured following the Rout of Winchester in 1141 , and Matilda agreed to exchange him for Stephen .
Matilda became trapped in Oxford Castle by Stephen 's forces that winter , and was forced to escape across the frozen River Isis at night to avoid capture .
The war degenerated into a stalemate , with Matilda controlling much of the south-west of England , and Stephen the south-east and the Midlands .
Large parts of the rest of the country were in the hands of local , independent barons .
Matilda returned to Normandy , now in the hands of her husband , in 1148 , leaving her eldest son to continue the campaign in England ; he eventually succeeded to the throne as Henry II in 1154 .
She settled her court near Rouen and for the rest of her life concerned herself with the administration of Normandy , acting on Henry 's behalf when necessary .
Particularly in the early years of her son 's reign , she provided political advice and attempted to mediate during the Becket controversy .
She worked extensively with the Church , founding Cistercian monasteries , and was known for her piety .
She was buried under the high altar at Bec Abbey after her death in 1167 .