Endometrial cancer is a cancer that arises from the endometrium -LRB- the lining of the uterus or womb -RRB- .
It is the result of the abnormal growth of cells that have the ability to invade or spread to other parts of the body .
The first sign is most often vaginal bleeding not associated with a menstrual period .
Other symptoms include pain with urination or sexual intercourse , or pelvic pain .
Endometrial cancer occurs most commonly after menopause .
Approximately 40 % of cases are related to obesity .
Endometrial cancer is also associated with excessive estrogen exposure , high blood pressure and diabetes .
Whereas taking estrogen alone increases the risk of endometrial cancer , taking both estrogen and a progestogen in combination , as in most birth control pills , decreases the risk .
Between two and five percent of cases are related to genes inherited from the parents .
Endometrial cancer is sometimes loosely referred to as `` uterine cancer '' , although it is distinct from other forms of uterine cancer such as cervical cancer , uterine sarcoma , and trophoblastic disease .
The most frequent type of endometrial cancer is endometrioid carcinoma , which accounts for more than 80 % of cases .
Endometrial cancer is commonly diagnosed by endometrial biopsy or by taking samples during a procedure known as dilation and curettage .
A pap smear is not typically sufficient to show endometrial cancer .
Regular screening in those at normal risk is not called for .
The leading treatment option for endometrial cancer is abdominal hysterectomy -LRB- the total removal by surgery of the uterus -RRB- , together with removal of the fallopian tubes and ovaries on both sides , called a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy .
In more advanced cases , radiation therapy , chemotherapy or hormone therapy may also be recommended .
If the disease is diagnosed at an early stage , the outcome is favorable , and the overall five-year survival rate in the United States is greater than 80 % .
In 2012 , endometrial cancers newly occurred in 320,000 women and caused 76,000 deaths .
This makes it the third most common cause of death in cancers which only affect women , behind ovarian and cervical cancer .
It is more common in the developed world and is the most common cancer of the female reproductive tract in developed countries .
Rates of endometrial cancer have risen in a number of countries between the 1980s and 2010 .
This is believed to be due to the increasing number of elderly people and increasing rates of obesity .