Estonia -LRB- -LSB- ɛˈstoʊniə -RSB- Eesti -LSB- ˈeːsti -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Republic of Estonia -LRB- -LSB- Eesti Vabariik , links = no -RSB- -RRB- , is a country in the Baltic region of Northern Europe .
It is bordered to the north by the Gulf of Finland , to the west by the Baltic Sea , to the south by Latvia -LRB- 343 km -RRB- , and to the east by Lake Peipus and Russia -LRB- 338.6 km -RRB- .
Across the Baltic Sea lies Sweden in the west and Finland in the north .
The territory of Estonia consists of a mainland and 2,222 islands and islets in the Baltic Sea , covering 45339 km2 of land and water , and is influenced by a humid continental climate .
The territory of Estonia has been inhabited since at least 6500 BC , with Finno-Ugric speakers -- the linguistic ancestors of modern Estonians -- arriving no later than around 1800 BC .
Following centuries of successive German , Danish , Swedish , and Russian rule , Estonians experienced a national awakening that culminated in independence from the Russian Empire towards the end of World War I .
During World War II , Estonia was occupied by the Soviet Union in 1940 , then by Nazi Germany a year later and was again annexed by the Soviets in 1944 , after which it was reconstituted as the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic .
In 1988 , during the Singing Revolution , the Estonian Supreme Soviet issued the Estonian Sovereignty Declaration in defiance of Soviet rule , and independence was restored on 20 August 1991 .
Estonia is a democratic parliamentary republic divided into fifteen counties .
Its capital and largest city is Tallinn .
With a population of 1.3 million , it is one of the least-populous member states of the European Union , Eurozone , North Atlantic Treaty Organization -LRB- NATO -RRB- , OECD and Schengen Area .
Ethnic Estonians are a Finnic people , sharing close cultural ties with their northern neighbour , Finland , and the official language , Estonian , is a Finno-Ugric language closely related to Finnish and the Sami languages , and distantly to Hungarian .
Estonia is a developed country with an advanced , high-income economy that is among the fastest growing in the EU .
Its Human Development Index ranks very highly , and it performs favourably in measurements of economic freedom , civil liberties and press freedom -LRB- 3rd in the world in 2012 and 2007 -RRB- .
The 2015 PISA test places Estonian high school students 3rd in the world , behind Singapore and Japan .
Citizens of Estonia are provided with universal health care , free education and the longest paid maternity leave in the OECD .
Since independence the country has rapidly developed its IT sector , becoming one of the world 's most digitally advanced societies .
In 2005 Estonia became the first nation to hold elections over the Internet , and in 2014 the first nation to provide E-residency .