Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz -LRB- -LSB- fiˈðel aleˈhandɾo ˈkastɾo ˈrus -RSB- ; August 13 , 1926 -- November 25 , 2016 -RRB- was a Cuban revolutionary and politician who governed the Republic of Cuba as Prime Minister from 1959 to 1976 and then as President from 1976 to 2008 .
Politically a Marxist -- Leninist and Cuban nationalist , he also served as the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba from 1961 until 2011 .
Under his administration , Cuba became a one-party socialist state ; industry and business were nationalized , and state socialist reforms were implemented throughout society .
Born in Birán , Oriente as the son of a wealthy Spanish farmer , Castro adopted leftist anti-imperialist politics while studying law at the University of Havana .
After participating in rebellions against right-wing governments in the Dominican Republic and Colombia , he planned the overthrow of Cuban President Fulgencio Batista , launching a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks in 1953 .
After a year 's imprisonment , he traveled to Mexico where he formed a revolutionary group , the 26th of July Movement , with his brother Raúl Castro and Che Guevara .
Returning to Cuba , Castro took a key role in the Cuban Revolution by leading the Movement in a guerrilla war against Batista 's forces from the Sierra Maestra .
After Batista 's overthrow in 1959 , Castro assumed military and political power as Cuba 's Prime Minister .
The United States came to oppose Castro 's government , and unsuccessfully attempted to remove him by assassination , economic blockade , and counter-revolution , including the Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961 .
Countering these threats , Castro formed an alliance with the Soviet Union and allowed the Soviets to place nuclear weapons in Cuba , sparking the Cuban Missile Crisis -- a defining incident of the Cold War -- in 1962 .
Adopting a Marxist -- Leninist model of development , Castro converted Cuba into a one-party , socialist state under Communist Party rule , the first in the Western Hemisphere .
Policies introducing central economic planning and expanding healthcare and education were accompanied by state control of the press and the suppression of internal dissent .
Abroad , Castro supported anti-imperialist revolutionary groups , backing the establishment of Marxist governments in Chile , Nicaragua , and Grenada , and sending troops to aid allies in the Yom Kippur War , Ogaden War , and Angolan Civil War .
These actions , coupled with Castro 's leadership of the Non-Aligned Movement from 1979 to 1983 and Cuba 's medical internationalism , increased Cuba 's profile on the world stage .
Following the Soviet Union 's dissolution in 1991 , Castro led Cuba into its `` Special Period '' and embraced environmentalist and anti-globalization ideas .
In the 2000s he forged alliances in the Latin American `` pink tide '' -- namely with Hugo Chávez 's Venezuela -- and signed Cuba up to the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas .
In 2006 he transferred his responsibilities to Vice-President Raúl Castro , who was elected to the presidency by the National Assembly in 2008 .
Castro is a polarizing world figure .
His supporters view him as a champion of socialism and anti-imperialism whose revolutionary regime advanced economic and social justice while securing Cuba 's independence from American imperialism .
Critics view him as a dictator whose administration oversaw human-rights abuses , the exodus of a large number of Cubans , and the impoverishment of the country 's economy .
He was decorated with various international awards and significantly influenced various individuals and groups across the world .