Mozilla Firefox -LRB- or simply Firefox -RRB- is a free and open-source web browser developed by the Mozilla Foundation and its subsidiary the Mozilla Corporation .
Firefox is available for Windows , macOS and Linux operating systems , with its Firefox for Android available for Android -LRB- formerly Firefox for mobile , it also ran on the discontinued Firefox OS -RRB- ; where all of these versions use the Gecko layout engine to render web pages , which implements current and anticipated web standards .
An additional version , Firefox for iOS , was released in late 2015 , but this version does not use Gecko due to Apple 's restrictions limiting third-party web browsers to the WebKit-based layout engine built into iOS .
Firefox was created in 2002 under the name `` Phoenix '' by Mozilla community members who desired a standalone browser , rather than the Mozilla Application Suite bundle .
Even during its beta phase , Firefox proved to be popular with its testers and was praised for its speed , security , and add-ons compared to Microsoft 's then-dominant Internet Explorer 6 .
Firefox was released in November 2004 , and was highly successful with 60 million downloads within nine months , which was the first time that Internet Explorer 's dominance was challenged .
Firefox is considered the spiritual successor of Netscape Navigator , as the Mozilla community was created by Netscape in 1998 before their acquisition by AOL .
Firefox usage grew to a peak of 32 % at the end of 2009 , temporarily making version 3.5 the world 's most popular browser .
Usage then declined in competition with Google Chrome .
, Firefox has between 9 % and 16 % of worldwide usage as a `` desktop '' browser , making it the second most popular web browser .
Firefox is still the most popular desktop browser in Cuba -LRB- even most popular overall -RRB- , Eritrea , and Germany , with 85.93 % , 79.39 % , and 37.01 % of the market share , respectively .
It is also the most popular desktop browser in many other African countries .
According to Mozilla , there were half a billion Firefox users around the world .