Florida -LSB- ˈflɒrᵻdə -RSB- -LRB- Spanish for `` land of flowers '' -RRB- is a state located in the southeastern region of the United States .
It is bordered to the west by the Gulf of Mexico , to the north by Alabama and Georgia , to the east by the Atlantic Ocean , and to the south by the Straits of Florida and Cuba .
Florida is the 22nd-most extensive , the 3rd-most populous , and the 8th-most densely populated of the U.S. states .
Jacksonville is the most populous municipality in the state and is the largest city by area in the contiguous United States .
The Miami metropolitan area is Florida 's most populous urban area .
The city of Tallahassee is the state capital .
A peninsula between the Gulf of Mexico , the Atlantic Ocean , and the Straits of Florida , it has the longest coastline in the contiguous United States , approximately 1350 mi , and is the only state that borders both the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean .
Much of the state is at or near sea level and is characterized by sedimentary soil .
The climate varies from subtropical in the north to tropical in the south .
The American alligator , American crocodile , Florida panther , and manatee can be found in the Everglades National Park .
Since the first European contact was made in 1513 by Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de León -- who named it La Florida -LRB- -LSB- la floˈɾiða -RSB- `` land of flowers '' -RRB- upon landing there in the Easter season , Pascua Florida -- Florida was a challenge for the European colonial powers before it gained statehood in the United States in 1845 .
It was a principal location of the Seminole Wars against the Native Americans , and racial segregation after the American Civil War .
Today , Florida is distinctive for its large Cuban expatriate community and high population growth , as well as for its increasing environmental issues .
The state 's economy relies mainly on tourism , agriculture , and transportation , which developed in the late 19th century .
Florida is also renowned for amusement parks , orange crops , the Kennedy Space Center , and as a popular destination for retirees .
Florida culture is a reflection of influences and multiple inheritance ; Native American , European American , Hispanic and Latino , and African American heritages can be found in the architecture and cuisine .
Florida has attracted many writers such as Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings , Ernest Hemingway and Tennessee Williams , and continues to attract celebrities and athletes .
It is internationally known for golf , tennis , auto racing and water sports .