Florida State University -LRB- commonly referred to as Florida State or FSU -RRB- is an American public space-grant and sea-grant research university .
Its primary campus is located on a 1,391.54-acre -LRB- 5.631 km2 -RRB- campus in Tallahassee , Florida , United States .
It is a senior member of the State University System of Florida .
Founded in 1851 , it is located on the oldest continuous site of higher education in the state of Florida .
The university is classified as a Research University with Very High Research by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching .
The university comprises 16 separate colleges and more than 110 centers , facilities , labs and institutes that offer more than 360 programs of study , including professional school programs .
The university has an annual budget of over $ 1.7 billion and an annual economic impact of over $ 10 billion .
Florida State is home to Florida 's only National Laboratory -- the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and is the birthplace of the commercially viable anti-cancer drug Taxol .
Florida State University also operates The John & Mable Ringling Museum of Art , the State Art Museum of Florida and one of the largest museum/university complexes in the nation .
The university is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools -LRB- SACS -RRB- .
Florida State University is home to nationally ranked programs in many academic areas , including law , business , engineering , medicine , social policy , film , music , theater , dance , visual art , political science , psychology , social work , and the sciences .
Florida State University leads Florida in four of eight areas of external funding for the STEM disciplines -LRB- Science , Technology , Engineering and Math -RRB- .
FSU officially launched the `` Raise the Torch : The Campaign for Florida State '' on October 17 , 2014 .
The campaign has a fundraising goal of more than $ 1 billion which will improve academics , research , and the overall student experience .
As of September 30 , 2016 , Florida State University 's `` Raise the Torch '' campaign has raised $ 938,972,249 .
For 2017 , U.S. News & World Report ranked Florida State as the 38th best public university in the United States .
Florida Governor Rick Scott and the state legislature designated Florida State University as one of two `` preeminent '' state universities in the spring of 2013 among the twelve universities of the State University System of Florida .
FSU 's intercollegiate sports teams , commonly known by their `` Florida State Seminoles '' nickname , compete in National Collegiate Athletic Association -LRB- NCAA -RRB- Division I and the Atlantic Coast Conference -LRB- ACC -RRB- .
In their 113-year history , Florida State 's varsity sports teams have won 20 national athletic championships and Seminole athletes have won 78 individual NCAA national championships .