Folklore is the body of expressive culture shared by a particular group of people ; it encompasses the traditions common to that culture , subculture or group .
These include oral traditions such as tales , proverbs and jokes .
They include material culture , ranging from traditional building styles to handmade toys common to the group .
Folklore also includes customary lore , the forms and rituals of celebrations such as Christmas and weddings , folk dances and initiation rites .
Each one of these , either singly or in combination , is considered a folklore artifact .
Just as essential as the form , folklore also encompasses the transmission of these artifacts from one region to another or from one generation to the next .
For folklore is not taught in a formal school curriculum or studied in the fine arts .
Instead these traditions are passed along informally from one individual to another either through verbal instruction or demonstration .
The academic study of folklore is called folkloristics .
To fully understand folklore , it is helpful to clarify its component parts : the terms folk and lore .
It is well-documented that the term was coined in 1846 by the Englishman William Thoms .
He fabricated it to replace the contemporary terminology of `` popular antiquities '' or `` popular literature '' .
The second half of the compound word , lore , proves easier to define as its meaning has stayed relatively stable over the last two centuries .
Coming from Old English lār ` instruction , ' and with German and Dutch cognates , it is the knowledge and traditions of a particular group , frequently passed along by word of mouth .
The concept of folk proves somewhat more elusive .
When Thoms first created this term , folk applied only to rural , frequently poor and illiterate peasants .
A more modern definition of folk is a social group which includes two or more persons with common traits , who express their shared identity through distinctive traditions .
`` Folk is a flexible concept which can refer to a nation as in American folklore or to a single family . ''
This expanded social definition of folk supports a broader view of the material , i.e. the lore , considered to be folklore artifacts .
These now include all `` things people make with words -LRB- verbal lore -RRB- , things they make with their hands -LRB- material lore -RRB- , and things they make with their actions -LRB- customary lore -RRB- '' .
Folklore is no longer circumscribed as being chronologically old or obsolete .
The folklorist studies the traditional artifacts of a social group and how they are transmitted .
Transmission is a vital part of the folklore process .
Without communicating these beliefs and customs within the group over space and time , they would become cultural shards relegated to cultural archaeologists .
For folklore is also a verb .
These folk artifacts continue to be passed along informally , as a rule anonymously and always in multiple variants .
The folk group is not individualistic , it is community-based and nurtures its lore in community .
`` As new groups emerge , new folklore is created ... surfers , motorcyclists , computer programmers '' .
In direct contrast to high culture , where any single work of a named artist is protected by copyright law , folklore is a function of shared identity within the social group .
Having identified folk artifacts , the professional folklorist strives to understand the significance of these beliefs , customs and objects for the group .
For these cultural units would not be passed along unless they had some continued relevance within the group .
That meaning can however shift and morph .
So Halloween of the 21st century is not the All Hallows ' Eve of the Middle Ages , and even gives rise to its own set of urban legends independent of the historical celebration .
The cleansing rituals of Orthodox Judaism were originally good public health in a land with little water ; now these customs signify identification as an Orthodox Jew .
Compare this to brushing your teeth , also transmitted within a group , which remains a practical hygiene and health issue and does not rise to the level of a group-defining tradition .
For tradition is initially remembered behavior .
Once it loses its practical purpose , there is no reason for further transmission unless it has been imbued with meaning beyond the initial practicality of the action .
This meaning is at the core of folkloristics , the study of folklore .
With an increasingly theoretical sophistication of the social sciences , it has become evident that folklore is a naturally occurring and necessary component of any social group , it is indeed all around us .
It does not have to be old or antiquated .
It continues to be created , transmitted and in any group is used to differentiate between `` us '' and `` them '' .