Foo Fighters is an American rock band , formed in Seattle , Washington in 1994 .
It was founded by Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl as a one-man project following the dissolution of Nirvana after the death of Kurt Cobain .
The group got its name from the UFOs and various aerial phenomena that were reported by Allied aircraft pilots in World War II , which were known collectively as `` foo fighters '' .
Prior to the release of Foo Fighters ' 1995 debut album Foo Fighters , which featured Grohl as the only official member , Grohl recruited bassist Nate Mendel and drummer William Goldsmith , both formerly of Sunny Day Real Estate , as well as Nirvana touring guitarist Pat Smear to complete the lineup .
The band began with performances in Portland , Oregon .
Goldsmith quit during the recording of the group 's second album , The Colour and the Shape -LRB- 1997 -RRB- , when most of the drum parts were re-recorded by Grohl himself .
Smear 's departure followed soon afterward , though he would rejoin them in 2006 .
They were replaced by Taylor Hawkins and Franz Stahl , respectively , although Stahl was fired before the recording of the group 's third album , There Is Nothing Left to Lose -LRB- 1999 -RRB- .
The band briefly continued as a trio until Chris Shiflett joined as the band 's lead guitarist after the completion of There Is Nothing Left to Lose .
The band released its fourth album , One by One , in 2002 .
The group followed that release with the two-disc In Your Honor -LRB- 2005 -RRB- , which was split between acoustic songs and heavier material .
Foo Fighters released its sixth album , Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace , in 2007 .
The band 's seventh studio album , Wasting Light , produced by Butch Vig was released in 2011 , in which Smear returned as a full member .
In November 2014 , the band 's eighth studio album , Sonic Highways , was released as an accompanying soundtrack to the Grohl-directed 2014 miniseries of the same name .
Over the course of the band 's career , four of its albums have won Grammy Awards for Best Rock Album .
As of 2015 , the band 's eight albums have sold 12 million copies in the U.S. , and 30 million worldwide .