The French Resistance -LRB- La Résistance -RRB- was the collection of French resistance movements that fought against the Nazi German occupation of France and against the collaborationist Vichy régime during the Second World War .
Résistance cells were small groups of armed men and women -LRB- called the Maquis in rural areas -RRB- , who , in addition to their guerrilla warfare activities , were also publishers of underground newspapers , providers of first-hand intelligence information , and maintainers of escape networks that helped Allied soldiers and airmen trapped behind enemy lines .
The men and women of the Résistance came from all economic levels and political leanings of French society , including émigrés ; academics , students , aristocrats , conservative Roman Catholics -LRB- including priests -RRB- and also citizens from the ranks of liberals , anarchists and communists .
The French Resistance played a significant role in facilitating , through means of giving supplies , and vital information , the Allies ' rapid advance through France following the invasion of Normandy on 6 June 1944 , and the lesser-known invasion of Provence on 15 August , by providing military intelligence on the German defences known as the Atlantic Wall and on Wehrmacht deployments and orders of battle .
The Résistance also planned , coordinated , and executed acts of sabotage on the electrical power grid , transport facilities , and telecommunications networks .
It was also politically and morally important to France , both during the German occupation and for decades afterward , because it provided the country with an inspiring example of the patriotic fulfillment of a national imperative , countering an existential threat to French nationhood .
The actions of the Résistance stood in marked contrast to the collaboration of the French regime based at Vichy , the French people who joined the pro-Nazi Milice française and the French men who joined the Waffen SS .
After the landings in Normandy and Provence , the paramilitary components of the Résistance were organised more formally , into a hierarchy of operational units known , collectively , as the French Forces of the Interior -LRB- FFI -RRB- .
Estimated to have a strength of 100,000 in June 1944 , the FFI grew rapidly and reached approximately 400,000 by October of that year .
Although the amalgamation of the FFI was , in some cases , fraught with political difficulties , it was ultimately successful , and it allowed France to rebuild the fourth-largest army in the European theatre -LRB- 1.2 million men -RRB- by VE Day in May 1945 .