Frozen is a 2013 American 3D computer-animated musical fantasy film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures .
It is the 53rd Disney animated feature film .
Inspired by Hans Christian Andersen 's fairy tale `` The Snow Queen '' , the film tells the story of a fearless princess who sets off on a journey alongside a rugged iceman , his loyal pet reindeer , and a naïve snowman to find her estranged sister , whose icy powers have inadvertently trapped the kingdom in eternal winter .
Frozen underwent several story treatments for years before being commissioned in 2011 , with a screenplay written by Jennifer Lee , and Chris Buck also serving as directors .
It features the voices of Kristen Bell , Idina Menzel , Jonathan Groff , Josh Gad and Santino Fontana .
Christophe Beck , who had worked on Disney 's award-winning short Paperman -LRB- 2012 -RRB- , was hired to compose the film 's orchestral score , while husband-and-wife songwriting team Robert Lopez and Kristen Anderson-Lopez wrote the songs .
Frozen premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California , on November 19 , 2013 , and went into general theatrical release on November 27 .
It was met with strongly positive reviews from critics and audiences , with some film critics considering Frozen to be the best Disney animated feature film since the studio 's renaissance era .
The film was also a massive commercial success ; it accumulated nearly $ 1.3 billion in worldwide box office revenue , $ 400 million of which was earned in the United States and Canada and $ 247 million of which was earned in Japan .
It ranks as the highest-grossing animated film of all time , the third-highest-grossing original film of all time , the ninth-highest-grossing film of all time , the highest-grossing film of 2013 , and the third-highest-grossing film in Japan .
With over 18 million home media sales in 2014 , it became the best-selling film of the year in the United States .
By January 2015 , Frozen had become the all-time best-selling Blu-ray Disc in the United States .
Frozen won two Academy Awards for Best Animated Feature and Best Original Song -LRB- `` Let It Go '' -RRB- , the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film , the BAFTA Award for Best Animated Film , five Annie Awards -LRB- including Best Animated Feature -RRB- , two Grammy Awards for Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media and Best Song Written for Visual Media -LRB- `` Let It Go '' -RRB- , and two Critics ' Choice Movie Awards for Best Animated Feature and Best Original Song -LRB- `` Let It Go '' -RRB- .
An animated short sequel , Frozen Fever , premiered on March 13 , 2015 , with Disney 's Cinderella .
A holiday special will premiere on ABC in 2017 .
On March 12 , 2015 , a feature-length sequel was announced , with Buck and Lee returning as directors and Peter Del Vecho returning as producer .
It is set for release on November 27 , 2019 .