Kwon Ji-yong -LRB- ; born August 18 , 1988 -RRB- , better known by his stage name G-Dragon , is a South Korean rapper , singer-songwriter , record producer , and fashion icon .
After six years as a trainee under the record label YG Entertainment , G-Dragon rose to fame in the mid-2000s as one of two rappers in the South Korean hip hop boy band Big Bang .
Despite initial lukewarm receptions , the group became one of the best-selling digital group of all-time in Asia and one of the best-selling boy bands in the world .
G-Dragon debuted as a solo artist with the release of Heartbreaker in 2009 .
The album was a commercial success and earned the Mnet Asian Music Awards for Album of the Year , while the single of the same name became a number-one hit .
G-Dragon later formed a duo with fellow Big Bang member T.O.P to record and release the album GD & TOP -LRB- 2010 -RRB- , which contained the top-five hits `` High High '' , `` Oh Yeah '' , and `` Knock Out '' on the Gaon Digital Chart , while the album peaked at number-one .
His first EP One of a Kind -LRB- 2012 -RRB- was critically acclaimed and yielded `` One of a Kind '' , `` Crayon '' , and the number-one `` That XX '' , earning Record of the Year at the 22nd Seoul Music Awards .
The EP became the highest-selling album by a Korean soloist since his own Heartbreaker .
In 2013 , he embarked on his first worldwide tour as a solo artist , which included a four-dome tour in Japan , making him the first Korean soloist to do a dome tour .
G-Dragon was awarded Artist of the Year at the 15th Mnet Asian Music Awards following the success of his second studio album Coup d'Etat -LRB- 2013 -RRB- , in addition to the awards of World 's Best Entertainer and World 's Best Album at the 2014 World Music Awards .
Recognized as one of the most influential leaders in music and fashion in his country and labelled as an `` K-pop icon '' , G-Dragon was named by Forbes the most influential person under 30 in Asia 's entertainment and sports .
Producing not only for his band but also for his and his bandmates ' solo releases , G-Dragon has written 22 number one songs .