Gamal Abdel Nasser Hussein -LRB- جمال عبد الناصر حسين , -LSB- ɡæˈmæːl ʕæbdenˈnɑːsˤeɾ ħeˈseːn -RSB- ; 15 January 1918 -- 28 September 1970 -RRB- was the second President of Egypt , serving from 1956 until his death .
Nasser led the 1952 overthrow of the monarchy and introduced far-reaching land reforms the following year .
Following a 1954 attempt on his life by a Muslim Brotherhood member , he cracked down on the organization , put President Muhammad Naguib under house arrest , and assumed executive office , officially becoming president in June 1956 .
Nasser 's popularity in Egypt and the Arab world skyrocketed after his nationalization of the Suez Canal and his political victory in the subsequent Suez Crisis .
Calls for pan-Arab unity under his leadership increased , culminating with the formation of the United Arab Republic with Syria -LRB- 1958 -- 1961 -RRB- .
In 1962 , Nasser began a series of major socialist measures and modernization reforms in Egypt .
Despite setbacks to his pan-Arabist cause , by 1963 Nasser 's supporters gained power in several Arab countries , but he became embroiled in the North Yemen Civil War .
He began his second presidential term in March 1965 after his political opponents were banned from running .
Following Egypt 's defeat by Israel in the 1967 Six-Day War , Nasser resigned , but he returned to office after popular demonstrations called for his reinstatement .
By 1968 , Nasser had appointed himself prime minister , launched the War of Attrition to regain lost territory , began a process of depoliticizing the military , and issued a set of political liberalization reforms .
After the conclusion of the 1970 Arab League summit , Nasser suffered a heart attack and died .
His funeral in Cairo drew five million mourners and an outpouring of grief across the Arab world .
Nasser remains an iconic figure in the Arab world , particularly for his strides towards social justice and Arab unity , modernization policies , and anti-imperialist efforts .
His presidency also encouraged and coincided with an Egyptian cultural boom , and launched large industrial projects , including the Aswan Dam and Helwan City .
Nasser 's detractors criticize his authoritarianism , corruption , incompetence , and human rights violations , his propagandistic manipulation of the populace , and his dominance of military over civil institutions , establishing a pattern of military and dictatorial rule in Egypt .