The third season of the fantasy drama television series Game of Thrones premiered in the United States on HBO on March 31 , 2013 , and concluded on June 9 , 2013 .
It was broadcast on Sunday at 9:00 pm in the United States , consisting of 10 episodes , each running approximately 50 -- 60 minutes .
The season is based roughly on the first half of A Storm of Swords -LRB- the third of the A Song of Ice and Fire novels by George R. R. Martin , of which the series is an adaptation -RRB- .
The series is adapted for television by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss .
HBO renewed the series for a third season on April 10 , 2012 , nine days after the second season 's premiere .
Production began in July 2012 .
The show was filmed primarily in Ireland , Northern Ireland , Croatia , Iceland and Morocco .
The story takes place in a fictional world , primarily upon a continent called Westeros , with one storyline occurring on another continent to the east known as Essos .
Like the novel , the season follows the climatic battle at Kings Landing .
Season three like the previous season mainly centres around the war of the five kings ; after the death of Renly Baratheon -LRB- Gethin Anthony -RRB- , all four kings in Westeros believes to have a claim to the Iron Throne , besides Robb Stark -LRB- Richard Madden -RRB- , who seeks vengeance for the death of his father , Lord Eddard `` Ned '' Stark -LRB- Sean Bean -RRB- .
Game of Thrones features a large ensemble cast , including Peter Dinklage , Nikolaj Coster-Waldau , Lena Headey , Emilia Clarke and Kit Harington .
The season introduced a number of new cast members , including Ciarán Hinds , Nathalie Emmanuel and Iwan Rheon .
Critics praised the show 's production values and cast .
Viewership yet again rose compared to the previous season .
It won 2 of the 16 Emmy Awards for which it was nominated , it received a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series -LRB- Dinklage -RRB- , Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series -LRB- Clarke -RRB- and Outstanding Drama Series .
It also won the Critics ' Choice Television Award for Best Drama Series .