The first season of the fantasy drama television series Game of Thrones premiered on HBO on April 17 , 2011 , at 9.00 pm in the U.S. , and concluded on June 19 , 2011 .
It consists of ten episodes , each of approximately 55 minutes .
The series is based on A Game of Thrones , the first novel in the A Song of Ice and Fire series by George R. R. Martin , adapted for television by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss .
HBO had ordered a television pilot in November 2008 ; filming began the following year .
However , it was deemed unsatisfactory and later reshot with some roles being recast .
In March 2010 , HBO ordered the first season , which began filming in July 2010 , primarily in Belfast , Northern Ireland , with additional filming in Malta .
The story takes place in a fictional world , primarily upon a continent called Westeros , with one storyline occurring on another continent to the east known as Essos .
Like the novel , the season initially focuses on the family of nobleman Eddard Stark , who is asked to become chief advisor to his king and longtime friend , Robert Baratheon .
Ned must find out who killed the previous Hand of the King , Jon Arryn , while trying to protect his family from their rivals the Lannisters .
He uncovers the dark secrets about the Lannisters that his predecessor died trying to expose .
Meanwhile , in Essos , the exiled Viserys Targaryen , son of the former king , believes he still has the rightful claim to the throne .
Game of Thrones features a large ensemble cast , including Bean , Addy , Peter Dinklage , Lena Headey , Nikolaj Coster-Waldau , Michelle Fairley and Iain Glen .
Newer actors were cast as the younger generation of characters , such as Kit Harington , Sophie Turner and Maisie Williams .
Critics praised the show 's production values and cast , with specific accolades for Dinklage 's portrayal of Tyrion Lannister .
The first season won two of the thirteen Emmy Awards for which it was nominated , for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series -LRB- Dinklage -RRB- and Outstanding Main Title Design .
It also received a nomination for Outstanding Drama Series .
Bean and Emilia Clarke also received individual accolades , as did Ramin Djawadi for music .
U.S. viewership rose by approximately 33 % over the course of the season , from 2.2 million to over 3 million by the finale .