Game of Thrones is an American fantasy drama television series created by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss .
It is an adaptation of A Song of Ice and Fire , George R. R. Martin 's series of fantasy novels , the first of which is A Game of Thrones .
It is filmed at Titanic Studios in Belfast , on location in the United Kingdom , and in Canada , Croatia , Iceland , Malta , Morocco , Spain , and the United States .
The series premiered on HBO in the United States on April 17 , 2011 , and its sixth season ended on June 26 , 2016 .
The series was renewed for a seventh season , which is scheduled to premiere on July 16 , 2017 , and will conclude with its eighth season in 2018 .
Set on the fictional continents of Westeros and Essos , Game of Thrones has several plot lines and a large ensemble cast .
The first story arc follows a dynastic conflict among competing claimants for succession to the Iron Throne of the Seven Kingdoms , with other noble families fighting for independence from the throne .
The second covers attempts to reclaim the throne by the exiled last scion of the realm 's deposed ruling dynasty ; the third chronicles the threat of the impending winter and the legendary creatures and fierce peoples of the North .
Game of Thrones has attracted record viewership on HBO and has a broad , active , international fan base .
It has been acclaimed by critics , particularly for its acting , complex characters , story , scope , and production values , although its frequent use of nudity and violence -LRB- including sexual violence -RRB- has attracted criticism .
The series has received 38 Primetime Emmy Awards , including Outstanding Drama Series in 2015 and 2016 , more than any other primetime scripted television series .
Its other awards and nominations include three Hugo Awards for Best Dramatic Presentation -LRB- 2012 -- 2014 -RRB- , a 2011 Peabody Award , and four nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series -- Drama -LRB- 2012 and 2015 -- 2017 -RRB- .
Of the ensemble cast , Peter Dinklage has won two Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series -LRB- 2011 and 2015 -RRB- and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor -- Series , Miniseries or Television Film -LRB- 2012 -RRB- for his performance as Tyrion Lannister .
Lena Headey , Emilia Clarke , Kit Harington , Maisie Williams , Diana Rigg , and Max von Sydow have also received Primetime Emmy Award nominations for their performances in the series .