General Motors Company , commonly known as GM , is an American multinational corporation headquartered in Detroit , Michigan , that designs , manufactures , markets , and distributes vehicles and vehicle parts , and sells financial services .
With global headquarters at the Renaissance Center in Detroit , Michigan , United States , GM manufactures cars and trucks in 35 countries .
In 2008 , 8.35 million GM cars and trucks were sold globally under various brands .
10 million cars sold milestone was exceeded on 2016 .
Current auto brands are Buick , Cadillac , Chevrolet , GMC , Holden , and Wuling .
Former GM automotive brands include McLaughlin , Oakland , Oldsmobile , Pontiac , Hummer , Saab , Saturn , Vauxhall , and Opel .
The company was founded by William C. Durant on September 16 , 1908 as a holding company .
The company was the largest automobile manufacturer from 1931 through 2007 .
In addition to brands selling assembled vehicles , GM has also had various automotive-component and non-automotive brands , many of which it divested in the 1980s through 2000s .
These have included Euclid and Terex -LRB- earthmoving/construction/mining equipment & vehicles -RRB- ; Electro-Motive Diesel -LRB- locomotive , marine , and industrial diesel engines -RRB- ; Detroit Diesel -LRB- automotive and industrial diesel engines -RRB- ; Allison -LRB- Aircraft engines , transmissions , gas turbine engines -RRB- ; Frigidaire -LRB- Appliances including refrigeration and air conditioning -RRB- ; New Departure -LRB- bearings -RRB- ; Delco Electronics and ACDelco -LRB- electrical and electronic components -RRB- ; GMAC -LRB- finance -RRB- ; General Aviation and North American Aviation -LRB- airplanes -RRB- ; GM Defense -LRB- military vehicles -RRB- ; and Electronic Data Systems -LRB- information technology -RRB- .
General Motors produces vehicles in 37 countries under twelve brands : Chevrolet , Buick , GMC , Cadillac , Holden , HSV , Opel , Vauxhall , Wuling , Baojun , Jie Fang , and Ravon .
The current company , General Motors Company -LRB- `` new GM '' -RRB- , was formed in 2009 following the bankruptcy of General Motors Corporation -LRB- `` old GM '' -RRB- , which became Motors Liquidation Company .
The new company purchased the majority of the assets of the old GM , including the brand `` General Motors '' .