Geoffrey Beevers -LRB- born 1941 -RRB- is a British actor who has appeared in many different stage and screen roles .
Beevers has worked extensively at the Orange Tree Theatre in Richmond upon Thames , both as an actor -LRB- including the title role in Jules Romain 's Doctor Knock , 1994 -RRB- ; and as an adaptor/director of George Eliot 's novel Adam Bede -LRB- February 1990 -RRB- , for which he won a Time Out Award , and Honoré de Balzac 's Père Goriot -LRB- February 1994 -RRB- .
Beevers has made two appearances in the BBC science fiction series Doctor Who , including as the third actor to play the Master in the serial The Keeper of Traken , a role he has since reprised in some of Big Finish Productions ' Doctor Who audio dramas -LRB- Dust Breeding , Master , Trail of the White Worm , The Oseidon Adventure , Mastermind , And You Will Obey Me , The Two Masters , The Light at the End , The Evil One , Requiem for the Rocket Men and Death Match -RRB- .
Beevers narrated the unabridged audio edition of Doctor Who : Harvest of Time , by Alastair Reynolds , released in June 2013 .
He also read the AudioGO -LRB- and later Audible -RRB- audiobooks of Doctor Who and the Terror of the Autons , Doctor Who and the Doomsday Weapon , Doctor Who and the Sea Devils , Doctor Who and the Space War , Doctor Who and the Deadly Assassin , and Doctor Who and the State of Decay .
He also played the vicar in the film Goodnight Mister Tom , and appeared in the 1978 television film The Nativity .
In 1988 he appeared in the TV movie sequel The Great Escape II : The Untold Story , and played Wainwright -LRB- Member of Parliament -RRB- in A Very British Coup for Channel 4 Television -LRB- UK -RRB- .
More recently , he played a small role in the 2010 remake of Clash of the Titans as a noble of Basilica .
In February 2010 Beevers played Douglas Hogg in the television film On Expenses .
In 2012 , Beevers appeared as Fray Antonio in the Royal Shakespeare Company production of Helen Edmundson 's The Heresy of Love .
In March 2013 he played opposite Helen Mirren in Peter Morgan 's play The Audience at the Gielgud Theatre , and reprised the role in February 2015 at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theatre in New York City .
In October 2016 to March 2017 he played Baron Gottfried Van Swieten in a new production of Amadeus by Peter Shaffer at the Royal National Theatre 's Olivier Stage .
He was married to Caroline John , who portrayed the Third Doctor 's companion Liz Shaw , from 1970 until her death on 5 June 2012 .