George III -LRB- George William Frederick ; 4 June 1738 -- 29 January 1820 -RRB- was King of Great Britain and Ireland from 25 October 1760 until the union of the two countries on 1 January 1801 , after which he was King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland until his death .
He was concurrently Duke and prince-elector of Brunswick-Lüneburg -LRB- `` Hanover '' -RRB- in the Holy Roman Empire until his promotion to King of Hanover on 12 October 1814 .
He was the third British monarch of the House of Hanover , but unlike his two predecessors he was born in Britain , spoke English as his first language , and never visited Hanover .
His life and with it his reign , which were longer than any other British monarch before him , were marked by a series of military conflicts involving his kingdoms , much of the rest of Europe , and places farther afield in Africa , the Americas and Asia .
Early in his reign , Great Britain defeated France in the Seven Years ' War , becoming the dominant European power in North America and India .
However , many of Britain 's American colonies were soon lost in the American War of Independence .
Further wars against revolutionary and Napoleonic France from 1793 concluded in the defeat of Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815 .
In the later part of his life , George III had recurrent , and eventually permanent , mental illness .
Although it has since been suggested that he had the blood disease porphyria , the cause of his illness remains unknown .
After a final relapse in 1810 , a regency was established , and George III 's eldest son , George , Prince of Wales , ruled as Prince Regent .
On George III 's death , the Prince Regent succeeded his father as George IV .
Historical analysis of George III 's life has gone through a `` kaleidoscope of changing views '' that have depended heavily on the prejudices of his biographers and the sources available to them .
Until it was reassessed in the second half of the 20th century , his reputation in the United States was one of a tyrant ; and in Britain he became `` the scapegoat for the failure of imperialism '' .