The Georgia Institute of Technology -LRB- commonly referred to as Georgia Tech , Tech , or GT -RRB- is a public research university in Atlanta , Georgia , in the United States .
It is a part of the University System of Georgia and has satellite campuses in Savannah , Georgia ; Metz , France ; Athlone , Ireland ; Shenzhen , China ; and Singapore .
The educational institution was founded in 1885 as the Georgia School of Technology as part of Reconstruction plans to build an industrial economy in the post-Civil War Southern United States .
Initially , it offered only a degree in mechanical engineering .
By 1901 , its curriculum had expanded to include electrical , civil , and chemical engineering .
In 1948 , the school changed its name to reflect its evolution from a trade school to a larger and more capable technical institute and research university .
Today , Georgia Tech is organized into six colleges and contains about 31 departments/units , with emphasis on science and technology .
It is well recognized for its degree programs in engineering , computing , business administration , the sciences , design , and liberal arts .
Georgia Tech is ranked 7th among all public national universities in the United States and 34th among all colleges and universities in U.S. News & World Report rankings , Georgia Tech is also highly regarded internationally for its engineering and business programs , and has been ranked as the `` smartest '' public college in America -LRB- based on average standardized test scores -RRB- .
Student athletics , both organized and intramural , are a part of student and alumni life .
The school 's intercollegiate competitive sports teams , the four-time football national champion Yellow Jackets , and the nationally recognized fight song `` Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech '' , have helped keep Georgia Tech in the national spotlight .
Georgia Tech fields eight men 's and seven women 's teams that compete in the NCAA Division I athletics and the Football Bowl Subdivision .
Georgia Tech is a member of the Coastal Division in the Atlantic Coast Conference .