Georges Albert Édouard Brutus Gilles de la Tourette -LRB- 30 October 1857 -- 26 May 1904 -RRB- was a French physician and the namesake of Tourette 's syndrome , a neurological condition characterized by physical and verbal tics .
He was born in the small town of Saint-Gervais-les-Trois-Clochers in the district of Châtellerault , near the city of Loudun .
He could be retrospectively classified as a neurologist , but the field did not exist in his time .
During 1873 Tourette began medical studies at Poitiers .
He later relocated to Paris where he became a student , amanuensis , and house physician of his mentor , the influential contemporary neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot , director of the Salpêtrière Hospital .
Charcot also helped him to advance in his academic career .
Tourette studied and lectured in psychotherapy , hysteria and medical and legal ramifications of mesmerism -LRB- modern-day hypnosis -RRB- .
Tourette described the symptoms of Tourette 's syndrome in nine patients in 1884 , using the name `` maladie des tics '' .
Charcot renamed the syndrome `` Gilles de la Tourette 's illness '' in his honor .
In 1893 , a former female patient shot Tourette in the head , claiming he had hypnotized her against her will .
Both Tourette and many modern hypnologists state that this is impossible .
His mentor , Charcot , had died recently , and his young son had also died recently .
After these events , Tourette began to experience mood swings between depression and hypomania .
Nevertheless , he organized public lectures in which he spoke about literacy , mesmerism and theatre .
Tourette published an article on hysteria in the German Army , which angered Bismarck , and a further article about unhygienic conditions in the floating hospitals on the river Thames .
With Gabriel Legué he analyzed abbess Jeanne des Anges ' account of her hysteria that was allegedly based on her unrequited love for a priest Urbain Grandier , who was later burned for witchcraft .
Around 1902 , Tourette 's condition worsened and he was dismissed from his post .
Gilles de la Tourette died on 26 May 1904 in a psychiatric hospital in Lausanne , Switzerland .