Gerald Rudolph Ford , Jr. -LRB- born Leslie Lynch King , Jr. ; July 14 , 1913 -- December 26 , 2006 -RRB- was an American politician who served as the 38th President of the United States from 1974 to 1977 , following the resignation of Richard Nixon .
Prior to this he served eight months as the 40th Vice President of the United States , following the resignation of Spiro Agnew .
He was the first person appointed to the vice presidency under the terms of the 25th Amendment , and consequently the only person to have served as both Vice President and President of the United States without being elected to executive office .
Before his appointment to the vice presidency , Ford served 25 years as U.S. Representative from Michigan 's 5th congressional district , the final nine of them as the House Minority Leader .
As President , Ford signed the Helsinki Accords , marking a move toward détente in the Cold War .
With the conquest of South Vietnam by North Vietnam nine months into his presidency , U.S. involvement in Vietnam essentially ended .
Domestically , Ford presided over the worst economy in the four decades since the Great Depression , with growing inflation and a recession during his tenure .
One of his most controversial acts was to grant a presidential pardon to President Richard Nixon for his role in the Watergate scandal .
During Ford 's presidency , foreign policy was characterized in procedural terms by the increased role Congress began to play , and by the corresponding curb on the powers of the President .
In the Republican presidential primary campaign of 1976 , Ford defeated former California Governor Ronald Reagan for the Republican nomination .
He narrowly lost the presidential election to the Democratic challenger , former Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter , making him the first President who succeeded to office as a result of a mid-term vacancy since Chester A. Arthur not to be elected in his own right .
Following his years as President , Ford remained active in the Republican Party .
After experiencing health problems , he died at home on December 26 , 2006 .
Ford lived longer than any other U.S. president -- 93 years and 165 days -- while his 895-day presidency was the shortest of all presidents who did not die in office .