Gil Sharone is an American drummer and member of the band Stolen Babies , Marilyn Manson , Team Sleep , and formerly The Dillinger Escape Plan .
He was also a fill in for punk rock band +44 .
His twin brother is Rani Sharone , also of Stolen Babies .
He is highly regarded as one of the most versatile touring/session drummers in the world .
Sharone supported Mark Hoppus 's band +44 when Travis Barker broke his arm .
Gil toured around Europe , Japan and Australia with +44 in early 2007 , it is believed he learned all of +44 's setlist on the flight from America to Europe .
He played on Travis 's OCDP Drum Kit , which is a custom made transparent green .
He started using Drum Workshop drums and hardware in October 2011 .
Sharone also recorded the drum tracks on the third Dillinger Escape Plan record Ire Works , and joined the band during all of their tour dates in 2008 -LRB- he played the European tour in early 2008 both with Dillinger and also as support with Stolen Babies -RRB- .
Gil also performed on Maynard James Keenan 's V Is for Vagina album by Puscifer .
In January 2009 , it was announced that Sharone had parted ways with Dillinger Escape Plan , due to his focus on Stolen Babies and other personal projects including his DVD , Wicked Beats , based on the drumming styles of Ska , Rocksteady and Reggae .
Wicked Beats will be released through Hudson Music late 2010 .
Sharone played Teenage Alex on an episode of Full House along with his twin brother , who played Teenage Nicky .
As of November 2013 , Sharone began working with Marilyn Manson on a new album .
On January 15 , 2015 The Pale Emperor was released .
Sharone is currently working on the follow up Heaven Upside Down
due to be released in Summer 2017 .
Sharone was featured on Reggae Grammy winners Morgan Heritage track `` So Amazing '' on the album Strictly Roots -LRB- 2016 -RRB- .
You can also hear his work playing on the film scores to `` John Wick , '' `` John Wick 2 , '' `` Slackers '' and the TV shows , `` Salem , '' `` Kingdom , '' and the Netflix series `` The Punisher -LRB- 2017 -RRB- . ''