A glacier -LRB- -LSB- pronˈɡleɪʃər -RSB- or -LSB- ˈɡlæsiə -RSB- -RRB- is a persistent body of dense ice that is constantly moving under its own weight ; it forms where the accumulation of snow exceeds its ablation -LRB- melting and sublimation -RRB- over many years , often centuries .
Glaciers slowly deform and flow due to stresses induced by their weight , creating crevasses , seracs , and other distinguishing features .
They also abrade rock and debris from their substrate to create landforms such as cirques and moraines .
Glaciers form only on land and are distinct from the much thinner sea ice and lake ice that form on the surface of bodies of water .
On Earth , 99 % of glacial ice is contained within vast ice sheets in the polar regions , but glaciers may be found in mountain ranges on every continent except Australia , and on a few high-latitude oceanic islands .
Between 35 ° N and 35 ° S , glaciers occur only in the Himalayas , Andes , Rocky Mountains , a few high mountains in East Africa , Mexico , New Guinea and on Zard Kuh in Iran .
Glaciers cover about 10 percent of Earth 's land surface .
Continental glaciers cover nearly 5 e6sqmi or about 98 percent of Antarctica 's 5.1 e6sqmi , with an average thickness of 7,000 ft. Greenland and Patagonia also have huge expanses of continental glaciers .
Glacial ice is the largest reservoir of fresh water on Earth .
Many glaciers from temperate , alpine and seasonal polar climates store water as ice during the colder seasons and release it later in the form of meltwater as warmer summer temperatures cause the glacier to melt , creating a water source that is especially important for plants , animals and human uses when other sources may be scant .
Within high altitude and Antarctic environments , the seasonal temperature difference is often not sufficient to release meltwater .
Because glacial mass is affected by long-term climatic changes , e.g. , precipitation , mean temperature , and cloud cover , glacial mass changes are considered among the most sensitive indicators of climate change and are a major source of variations in sea level .
A large piece of compressed ice , or a glacier , appears blue as large quantities of water appear blue .
This is because water molecules absorb other colors more efficiently than blue .
The other reason for the blue color of glaciers is the lack of air bubbles .
Air bubbles , which give a white color to ice , are squeezed out by pressure increasing the density of the created ice .