Global warming , also referred to as climate change , is the observed century-scale rise in the average temperature of the Earth 's climate system and its related effects .
Multiple lines of scientific evidence show that the climate system is warming .
Many of the observed changes since the 1950s are unprecedented in the instrumental temperature record which extends back to the mid 19th century , and in paleoclimate proxy records over thousands of years .
In 2013 , the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change -LRB- IPCC -RRB- Fifth Assessment Report concluded that `` It is extremely likely that human influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-20th century . ''
The largest human influence has been emission of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide , methane and nitrous oxide .
Climate model projections summarized in the report indicated that during the 21st century the global surface temperature is likely to rise a further 0.3 to for their lowest emissions scenario and 2.6 to for the highest emissions scenario .
These findings have been recognized by the national science academies of the major industrialized nations and are not disputed by any scientific body of national or international standing .
Future climate change and associated impacts will differ from region to region around the globe .
Anticipated effects include warming global temperature , rising sea levels , changing precipitation , and expansion of deserts in the subtropics .
Warming is expected to be greater over land than over the oceans and greatest in the Arctic , with the continuing retreat of glaciers , permafrost and sea ice .
Other likely changes include more frequent extreme weather events including heat waves , droughts , heavy rainfall with floods and heavy snowfall ; ocean acidification ; and species extinctions due to shifting temperature regimes .
Effects significant to humans include the threat to food security from decreasing crop yields and the abandonment of populated areas due to rising sea levels .
Because the climate system has a large `` inertia '' and greenhouse gases will stay in the atmosphere for a long time , many of these effects will not only exist for decades or centuries , but will persist for tens of thousands of years .
Possible societal responses to global warming include mitigation by emissions reduction , adaptation to its effects , building systems resilient to its effects , and possible future climate engineering .
Most countries are parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change -LRB- UNFCCC -RRB- ,
whose ultimate objective is to prevent dangerous anthropogenic climate change .
Parties to the UNFCCC have agreed that deep cuts in emissions are required and that global warming should be limited to well below 2.0 C-change relative to pre-industrial levels , with efforts made to limit warming to 1.5 C-change .
Public reactions to global warming and concern about its effects are also increasing .
A global 2015 Pew Research Center report showed a median of 54 % consider it `` a very serious problem '' .
There are significant regional differences , with Americans and Chinese -LRB- whose economies are responsible for the greatest annual CO2 emissions -RRB- among the least concerned .