Gone with the Wind is a novel by American writer Margaret Mitchell , first published in 1936 .
The story is set in Clayton County and Atlanta , both in Georgia , during the American Civil War and Reconstruction Era .
It depicts the struggles of young Scarlett O'Hara , the spoiled daughter of a well-to-do plantation owner , who must use every means at her disposal to claw her way out of poverty following Sherman 's destructive `` March to the Sea '' .
This historical novel features a Bildungsroman or coming-of-age story , with the title taken from a poem written by Ernest Dowson .
Gone with the Wind was popular with American readers from the outset and was the top American fiction bestseller in the year it was published and in 1937 .
As of 2014 , a Harris poll found it to be the second favorite book of American readers , just behind the Bible .
More than 30 million copies have been printed worldwide .
Written from the perspective of the slaveholder , Gone with the Wind is Southern plantation fiction .
Its portrayal of slavery and African Americans has been considered controversial , especially by succeeding generations , as well as its use of a racial epithet and ethnic slurs common to the period .
However , the novel has become a reference point for subsequent writers about the South , both black and white .
Scholars at American universities refer to it in their writings , interpret and study it .
The novel has been absorbed into American popular culture .
Mitchell received the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for the book in 1937 .
It was adapted into a 1939 American film .
Gone with the Wind is the only novel by Mitchell published during her lifetime .
Mitchell used color symbolism , especially the colors red and green , which frequently are associated with Scarlett O'Hara .
Mitchell identified the primary theme as survival .
She left the ending speculative for the reader , however .
She was often asked what became of her lovers , Rhett and Scarlett .
She replied , `` For all I know , Rhett may have found someone else who was less difficult . ''
Two sequels authorized by Mitchell 's estate were published more than a half century later .
A parody was also produced .