Google Search , commonly referred to as Google Web Search or simply Google , is a web search engine developed by Google .
It is the most-used search engine on the World Wide Web , handling more than three billion searches each day .
, it is the most used search engine in the US with 64.0 % market share .
The order of search on Google 's search-results pages is based , in part , on a priority rank called a `` PageRank '' .
Google Search provides many different options for customized search , using Boolean operators such as exclusion -LRB- '' - xx '' -RRB- , alternatives -LRB- `` xx OR yy OR zz '' -RRB- , and wildcards -LRB- `` Winston * Churchill '' returns `` Winston Churchill '' , `` Winston Spencer Churchill '' , etc. -RRB- .
The same and other options can be specified in a different way on an Advanced Search page .
The main purpose of Google Search is to hunt for text in publicly accessible documents offered by web servers , as opposed to other data , such as images or data contained in databases .
It was originally developed by Larry Page and Sergey Brin in 1997 .
Google Search provides several features beyond searching for words .
These include synonyms , weather forecasts , time zones , stock quotes , maps , earthquake data , movie showtimes , airports , home listings , and sports scores .
There are special features for numbers , dates , and some specific forms , including ranges , prices , temperatures , money and measurement unit conversions , calculations , package tracking , patents , area codes , and language translation .
In June 2011 Google introduced `` Google Voice Search '' to search for spoken , rather than typed , words .
In May 2012 Google introduced a Knowledge Graph semantic search feature in the U.S.
Analysis of the frequency of search terms may indicate economic , social and health trends .
Data about the frequency of use of search terms on Google can be openly inquired via Google Trends and have been shown to correlate with flu outbreaks and unemployment levels , and provide the information faster than traditional reporting methods and surveys .
As of mid-2016 , Google 's search engine has begun to rely on these deep neural networks .
In October 2016 , Gary Illyes , a webmaster trends analyst with Google , announced that the search engine will be making a new , primary web index dedicated for mobile , with a secondary , less up-to-date index for desktop use .
The change is a response from the continued growth in mobile , and a push for web developers to adopt a mobile-friendly version of their websites .
Illyes stated the change will happen in `` months '' .
Competitors of Google include Baidu and Soso.com in China ; Naver.com and Daum.net in South Korea ; Yandex in Russia ; Seznam.cz in the Czech Republic ; Yahoo in Japan , Taiwan and the US , as well as Bing and DuckDuckGo .
Some smaller search engines offer facilities not available with Google , e.g. not storing any private or tracking information ; one such search engine is Ixquick .