Granite -LRB- -LSB- pronˈɡrænᵻt -RSB- -RRB- is a common type of felsic intrusive igneous rock that is granular and phaneritic in texture .
Granites can be predominantly white , pink , or gray in color , depending on their mineralogy .
The word `` granite '' comes from the Latin granum , a grain , in reference to the coarse-grained structure of such a holocrystalline rock .
Strictly speaking , granite is an igneous rock with between 20 % and 60 % quartz by volume , and at least 35 % of the total feldspar consisting of alkali feldspar , although commonly the term `` granite '' is used to refer to a wider range of coarse grained igneous rocks containing quartz and feldspar .
The term `` granitic '' means granite-like and is applied to granite and a group of intrusive igneous rocks with similar textures and slight variations in composition and origin .
These rocks mainly consist of feldspar , quartz , mica , and amphibole minerals , which form an interlocking , somewhat equigranular matrix of feldspar and quartz with scattered darker biotite mica and amphibole -LRB- often hornblende -RRB- peppering the lighter color minerals .
Occasionally some individual crystals -LRB- phenocrysts -RRB- are larger than the groundmass , in which case the texture is known as porphyritic .
A granitic rock with a porphyritic texture is known as a granite porphyry .
Granitoid is a general , descriptive field term for lighter-colored , coarse-grained igneous rocks .
Petrographic examination is required for identification of specific types of granitoids .
The extrusive igneous rock equivalent of granite is rhyolite .
Granite is nearly always massive -LRB- lacking any internal structures -RRB- , hard and tough , and therefore it has gained widespread use throughout human history , and more recently as a construction stone .
The average density of granite is between 2.65 and 2.75 g/cm3 -LRB- 165.4 - 171.7 lb/ft3 -RRB- , its compressive strength usually lies above 200 MPa , and its viscosity near STP is 3 -- 6 • 1019 Pa · s.
The melting temperature of dry granite at ambient pressure is ; it is strongly reduced in the presence of water , down to 650 ° C at a few kBar pressure .
Granite has poor primary permeability , but strong secondary permeability .