Grand Theft Auto V is an action-adventure video game developed by Rockstar North and published by Rockstar Games .
It was released on 17 September 2013 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , on 18 November 2014 for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , and on 14 April 2015 for Microsoft Windows .
It is the first main entry in the Grand Theft Auto series since 2008 's Grand Theft Auto IV .
Set within the fictional state of San Andreas , based on Southern California , the single-player story follows three criminals and their efforts to commit heists while under pressure from a government agency .
The open world design lets players freely roam San Andreas ' open countryside and the fictional city of Los Santos , based on Los Angeles .
The game is played from either a first-person or third-person view and its world is navigated on foot or by vehicle .
Players control the three lead protagonists throughout single-player and switch between them both during and outside of missions .
The story is centred on the heist sequences , and many missions involve shooting and driving gameplay .
A `` wanted '' system governs the aggression of law enforcement response to players who commit crimes .
Grand Theft Auto Online , the online multiplayer mode , lets up to 30 players explore the open world and engage in cooperative or competitive game matches .
Development began soon after Grand Theft Auto IV 's release and was shared between many of Rockstar 's studios worldwide .
The development team drew influence from many of their previous projects such as Red Dead Redemption and Max Payne 3 , and designed the game around three lead protagonists to innovate on the core structure of its predecessors .
Much of the development work constituted the open world 's creation , and several team members conducted field research around California to capture footage for the design team .
The game 's soundtrack features an original score composed by a team of producers who collaborated over several years .
Extensively marketed and widely anticipated , the game broke industry sales records and became the fastest-selling entertainment product in history , earning US $ 800 million in its first day and US $ 1 billion in its first three days .
It received widespread critical acclaim , with praise directed at its multiple protagonist design , open world , presentation and gameplay .
However , it caused controversies related to its depiction of women and a mission featuring torture during a hostage interrogation .
Considered one of seventh generation console gaming 's most significant titles and among the best games ever made , it won year-end accolades including Game of the Year awards from several gaming publications .
It has shipped over 80 million copies and is one of the best-selling video games of all time .