Grunge -LRB- sometimes referred to as the Seattle sound -RRB- is a subgenre of alternative rock and a subculture that emerged during the in the Pacific Northwest U.S. state of Washington , particularly in Seattle and nearby towns .
The early grunge movement revolved around Seattle 's independent record label Sub Pop and that region 's underground music scene .
By the early 1990s its popularity had spread , with grunge acts appearing in California , then surfacing towards other parts of the United States and in Australia , building strong followings and signing major record deals .
Grunge became commercially successful in the early 1990s , due to releases such as Nirvana 's Nevermind , Pearl Jam 's Ten , Soundgarden 's Superunknown , Alice in Chains ' Dirt and Stone Temple Pilots ' Core .
The success of these bands boosted the popularity of alternative rock and made grunge the most popular form of rock music at the time .
Although most grunge bands had disbanded or faded from view by the late 1990s , they influenced modern rock music , as their lyrics brought socially conscious issues into pop culture and added introspection and an exploration of what it means to be true to oneself .
Grunge was also an influence on subsequent genres such as post-grunge and nu metal .
Grunge fuses elements of punk rock and heavy metal , such as the distorted electric guitar used in both genres , although some bands performed with more emphasis on one or the other .
Like these genres , grunge typically uses electric guitar , bass guitar , a drummer and a singer .
Grunge also incorporates influences from indie rock bands such as Sonic Youth .
Lyrics are typically angst-filled and introspective , often addressing themes such as social alienation , apathy , concerns about confinement , and a desire for freedom .
A number of factors contributed to grunge 's decline in prominence .
During the , many grunge bands broke up or became less visible .
Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain , labeled by Time as `` the John Lennon of the swinging Northwest '' , appeared unusually tortured by success and struggled with an addiction to heroin before he committed suicide at the age of 27 in 1994 .