Guardians of the Galaxy -LRB- retroactively referred to as Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
1 -RRB- is a 2014 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team of the same name , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
It is the tenth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe .
The film was directed by James Gunn , who wrote the screenplay with Nicole Perlman , and features an ensemble cast including Chris Pratt , Zoe Saldana , Dave Bautista , Vin Diesel , Bradley Cooper , Lee Pace , Michael Rooker , Karen Gillan , Djimon Hounsou , John C. Reilly , Glenn Close , and Benicio del Toro .
In Guardians of the Galaxy , Peter Quill forms an uneasy alliance with a group of extraterrestrial misfits who are fleeing after stealing a powerful artifact .
Perlman began working on the screenplay in 2009 .
Producer Kevin Feige first publicly mentioned Guardians of the Galaxy as a potential film in 2010 and Marvel Studios announced it was in active development at the San Diego Comic-Con International in July 2012 .
Gunn was hired to write and direct the film that September .
In February 2013 , Pratt was hired to play Peter Quill / Star-Lord , and the supporting cast members were subsequently confirmed .
Principal photography began in July 2013 at Shepperton Studios in England , with filming continuing in London before wrapping up in October 2013 .
Post-production was finished on July 7 , 2014 .
The film premiered in Hollywood on July 21 , 2014 .
It was released in theaters on August 1 , 2014 in the United States in the 3D and IMAX 3D formats .
The film became a critical and commercial success , grossing $ 773.3 million worldwide and becoming the highest-grossing superhero film of 2014 , as well as the third highest-grossing film in North America of 2014 .
The film garnered praise for its humor , action , soundtrack , visual effects , direction , musical score , and acting .
A sequel , Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
2 , was released on May 5 , 2017 , with a third film , Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
3 , planned .