Guatemala -LRB- -LSB- ɡwɑːtᵻˈmɑːlə , _ ɡwæ - , _ ɡɑː - -RSB- , or ; -LSB- gwateˈmala -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Republic of Guatemala -LRB- -LSB- República de Guatemala , links = no -RSB- -RRB- , is a country in Central America bordered by Mexico to the north and west , the Pacific Ocean to the southwest , Belize to the northeast , the Caribbean to the east , Honduras to the east and El Salvador to the southeast .
With an estimated population of around 15.8 million , it is the most populated state in Central America .
Guatemala is a representative democracy ; its capital and largest city is Nueva Guatemala de la Asunción , also known as Guatemala City .
The territory of modern Guatemala once formed the core of the Maya civilization , which extended across Mesoamerica .
Most of the country was conquered by the Spanish in the 16th century , becoming part of the viceroyalty of New Spain .
Guatemala attained independence in 1821 as part of the Federal Republic of Central America , which dissolved in 1841 .
From the mid to late 19th century , Guatemala experienced chronic instability and civil strife .
Beginning in the early 20th century , it was ruled by a series of dictators backed by the United Fruit Company and the United States government .
In 1944 , authoritarian leader Jorge Ubico was overthrown by a pro-democratic military coup , initiating a decade-long revolution that led to sweeping social and economic reforms .
A U.S.-backed military coup in 1954 ended the revolution and installed a dictatorship .
From 1960 to 1996 , Guatemala endured a bloody civil war fought between the US-backed government and leftist rebels , including genocidal massacres of the Maya population perpetrated by the military .
Since a United Nations-negotiated peace accord , Guatemala has witnessed both economic growth and successful democratic elections , though it continues to struggle with high rates of poverty , crime , drug trade , and instability .
As of 2014 , Guatemala ranks 31st of 33 Latin American and Caribbean countries in terms of the Human Development Index .
Guatemala 's abundance of biologically significant and unique ecosystems includes a large number of endemic species and contributes to Mesoamerica 's designation as a biodiversity hotspot .
The country is also known for its rich and distinct culture , which is characterized by a fusion of Spanish and Indigenous influences .