Hair : The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical is a rock musical with a book and lyrics by James Rado and Gerome Ragni and music by Galt MacDermot .
A product of the hippie counterculture and sexual revolution of the late 1960s , several of its songs became anthems of the anti-Vietnam War peace movement .
The musical 's profanity , its depiction of the use of illegal drugs , its treatment of sexuality , its irreverence for the American flag , and its nude scene caused much comment and controversy .
The musical broke new ground in musical theatre by defining the genre of `` rock musical '' , using a racially integrated cast , and inviting the audience onstage for a `` Be-In '' finale .
Hair tells the story of the `` tribe '' , a group of politically active , long-haired hippies of the `` Age of Aquarius '' living a bohemian life in New York City and fighting against conscription into the Vietnam War .
Claude , his good friend Berger , their roommate Sheila and their friends struggle to balance their young lives , loves , and the sexual revolution with their rebellion against the war and their conservative parents and society .
Ultimately , Claude must decide whether to resist the draft as his friends have done , or to succumb to the pressures of his parents -LRB- and conservative America -RRB- to serve in Vietnam , compromising his pacifist principles and risking his life .
After an off-Broadway debut in October 1967 at Joseph Papp 's Public Theater and a subsequent run at the Cheetah nightclub from December 1967 through January 1968 , the show opened on Broadway in April 1968 and ran for 1,750 performances .
Simultaneous productions in cities across the United States and Europe followed shortly thereafter , including a successful London production that ran for 1,997 performances .
Since then , numerous productions have been staged around the world , spawning dozens of recordings of the musical , including the 3 million-selling original Broadway cast recording .
Some of the songs from its score became Top 10 hits , and a feature film adaptation was released in 1979 .
A Broadway revival opened in 2009 , earning strong reviews and winning the Tony Award and Drama Desk Award for best revival of a musical .
In 2008 , Time magazine wrote , `` Today Hair seems , if anything , more daring than ever . ''