The Hanford Site is a mostly decommissioned nuclear production complex operated by the United States federal government on the Columbia River in the U.S. state of Washington .
The site has been known by many names , including : Hanford Project , Hanford Works , Hanford Engineer Works and Hanford Nuclear Reservation .
Established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project in Hanford , south-central Washington , the site was home to the B Reactor , the first full-scale plutonium production reactor in the world .
Plutonium manufactured at the site was used in the first nuclear bomb , tested at the Trinity site , and in Fat Man , the bomb detonated over Nagasaki , Japan .
During the Cold War , the project expanded to include nine nuclear reactors and five large plutonium processing complexes , which produced plutonium for most of the more than 60,000 weapons built for the U.S. nuclear arsenal .
Nuclear technology developed rapidly during this period , and Hanford scientists produced major technological achievements .
Many early safety procedures and waste disposal practices were inadequate , and government documents have confirmed that Hanford 's operations released significant amounts of radioactive materials into the air and the Columbia River .
The weapons production reactors were decommissioned at the end of the Cold War , and decades of manufacturing left behind 53 e6USgal of high-level radioactive waste stored within 177 storage tanks , an additional 25 e6cuft of solid radioactive waste , and 200 sqmi of contaminated groundwater beneath the site .
In 2011 , the federal agency charged with overseeing the site , the US Department of Energy -LRB- DOE -RRB- , emptied 149 single-shell tanks by pumping nearly all of the liquid waste out into 28 newer double-shell tanks .
DOE later found water intruding into at least 14 single-shell tanks and that one of them had been leaking about 640 USgal per year into the ground since about 2010 .
In 2012 , DOE discovered a leak also from a double-shell tank caused by construction flaws and corrosion in the bottom , and that 12 double-shell tanks have similar construction flaws .
Since then , DOE changed to monitoring single-shell tanks monthly and double-shell tanks every 3 years , and also changed monitoring methods .
In March 2014 , DOE announced further delays in the construction of the Waste Treatment Plant , which will affect the schedule for removing waste from the tanks .
Intermittent discoveries of undocumented contamination have slowed the pace and raised the cost of cleanup .
In 2007 , the Hanford site represented two-thirds of the nation 's high-level radioactive waste by volume .
Hanford is currently the most contaminated nuclear site in the United States and is the focus of the nation 's largest environmental cleanup .
Besides the cleanup project , Hanford also hosts a commercial nuclear power plant , the Columbia Generating Station , and various centers for scientific research and development , such as the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and the LIGO Hanford Observatory .
On November 10 , 2015 , it was designated as part of the Manhattan Project National Historical Park alongside other sites in Oak Ridge and Los Alamos .