Maurice Harold Macmillan , 1st Earl of Stockton , -LRB- 10 February 1894 -- 29 December 1986 -RRB- was a British Conservative politician and statesman who served as the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 10 January 1957 to 19 October 1963 .
Nicknamed `` Supermac , '' he was known for his pragmatism , wit and unflappability .
Macmillan served in the Grenadier Guards during the First World War .
He was wounded three times , most severely in September 1916 during the Battle of the Somme .
He spent the rest of the war in a military hospital unable to walk , and suffered pain and partial immobility for the rest of his life .
After the war Macmillan joined his family business , then entered Parliament in the 1924 General Election , for the northern industrial constituency of Stockton-on-Tees .
After losing his seat in 1929 , he regained it in 1931 , soon after which he spoke out against the high rate of unemployment in Stockton-On-Tees , and against appeasement .
Rising to high office during the Second World War as a protégé of wartime Prime Minister Winston Churchill , Macmillan then served as Foreign Secretary and Chancellor of the Exchequer under Churchill 's successor Sir Anthony Eden .
When Eden resigned in 1957 after the Suez Crisis , Macmillan succeeded him as Prime Minister .
As a One Nation Tory of the Disraelian tradition , haunted by memories of the Great Depression , he believed in the post-war settlement and the necessity of a mixed economy , championing a Keynesian strategy of public investment to maintain demand and pursuing corporatist policies to develop the domestic market as the engine of growth .
Benefiting from favourable international conditions , he presided over an age of affluence , marked by low unemployment and high if uneven growth .
In his Bedford speech in July 1957 he told the nation they had ` never had it so good ' , but warned of the dangers of inflation , summing up the fragile prosperity of the 1950s .
The Conservatives were re-elected in 1959 with an increased majority on an electioneering budget .
In international affairs , Macmillan rebuilt the special relationship with the United States from the wreckage of the Suez Crisis -LRB- of which he had been one of the architects -RRB- , and redrew the world map by decolonising sub-Saharan Africa .
Reconfiguring the nation 's defences to meet the realities of the nuclear age , he ended National Service , strengthened the nuclear forces by acquiring Polaris , and pioneered the Nuclear Test Ban with the United States and the Soviet Union .
Belatedly recognising the dangers of strategic dependence , he sought a new role for Britain in Europe , but his unwillingness to disclose United States nuclear secrets to France contributed to a French veto of the United Kingdom 's entry into the European Economic Community .
Near the end of his premiership , his government was rocked by the Vassall and Profumo scandals , which seemed to symbolise for the rebellious youth of the 1960s the moral decay of the British establishment .
After his resignation , Macmillan lived out a long retirement as an elder statesman .
He was as trenchant a critic of his successors in his old age as he had been of his predecessors in his youth .
Macmillan was the last British prime minister born in the reign of Queen Victoria , the last to have served in the First World War , the last to wear a moustache when in office , and the last to receive an hereditary peerage .