Harry Potter is a series of fantasy novels written by British author J. K. Rowling .
The novels chronicle the life of a young wizard , Harry Potter , and his friends Hermione Granger and Ron Weasley , all of whom are students at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry .
The main story arc concerns Harry 's struggle against Lord Voldemort , a dark wizard who intends to become immortal , overthrow the wizard governing body known as the Ministry of Magic , and subjugate all wizards and Muggles , a reference term that means non-magical people .
Since the release of the first novel , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , on 26 June 1997 , the books have found immense popularity , critical acclaim and commercial success worldwide .
The series has now been translated into multiple languages including French , Irish , Spanish , German and Swedish to name a few .
They have attracted a wide adult audience as well as younger readers , and are often considered cornerstones of modern young adult literature .
The series has also had its share of criticism , including concern about the increasingly dark tone as the series progressed , as well as the often gruesome and graphic violence it depicts .
, the books have sold more than 500 million copies worldwide , making them the best-selling book series in history , and have been translated into seventy-three languages .
The last four books consecutively set records as the fastest-selling books in history , with the final instalment selling roughly eleven million copies in the United States within twenty-four hours of its release .
The series was originally published in English by two major publishers , Bloomsbury in the United Kingdom and Scholastic Press in the United States .
A play , Harry Potter and the Cursed Child , based on a story co-written by Rowling , premiered in London on 30 July 2016 at the Palace Theatre , and its script was published by Little , Brown as the eighth book in the series .
The original seven books were adapted into an eight-part film series by Warner Bros. .
Pictures , which has become the second highest-grossing film series of all time .
In 2016 , the total value of the Harry Potter franchise was estimated at $ 25 billion , making Harry Potter one of the highest-grossing media franchises of all time .
A series of many genres , including fantasy , drama , coming of age , friendship , and the British school story -LRB- which includes elements of mystery , thriller , adventure , horror and romance -RRB- , the world of Harry Potter explores numerous themes and includes many cultural meanings and references .
According to Rowling , the main theme is death .
Other major themes in the series include prejudice , corruption , and madness .
The success of the books and films has ensured that the Harry Potter franchise continues to expand , with numerous derivative works , a travelling exhibition that premiered in Chicago in 2009 , a studio tour in London that opened in 2012 , a digital platform on which J.K. Rowling updates the series with new information and insight , and a pentalogy of spin-off films premiering in November 2016 , among many other developments .
Most recently , themed attractions , collectively known as The Wizarding World of Harry Potter , have been built at several Universal Parks & Resorts amusement parks around the world .