Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows is the seventh and final novel of the Harry Potter series , written by British author J. K. Rowling .
The book was released on 21 July 2007 by Bloomsbury Publishing in the United Kingdom , in the United States by Scholastic , and in Canada by Raincoast Books , ending the series that began in 1997 with the publication of Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone .
The novel chronicles the events directly following Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince -LRB- 2005 -RRB- , and the final confrontation between the wizards Harry Potter and Lord Voldemort , as well as revealing the previously concealed back story of several main characters .
The title of the book refers to three mythical objects featured in the story , collectively known as the `` Deathly Hallows '' -- an unbeatable wand , a stone to bring the dead to life , and a cloak of invisibility .
Rowling finished writing Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows in January 2007 .
Before its release , Bloomsbury reportedly spent # 10 million to keep the book 's contents safe before its release date .
American publisher Arthur Levine refused any copies of the novel to be released in advance for press review , although two reviews were submitted early .
Shortly before release , photos of all 759 pages of the U.S. edition were leaked and transcribed , leading Scholastic to look for the source that had leaked it .
Released globally in 93 countries , Deathly Hallows broke sales records as the fastest-selling book ever , a record it still held in 2012 .
It sold 15 million copies in the first 24 hours following its release , including more than 11 million in the U.S. and UK alone .
The previous record , 9 million in its first day , had been held by Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince .
The novel has also been translated into over 120 languages .
The title proved difficult to translate and was often rendered closer to `` Harry Potter and the Relics of Death '' in other languages .
Major themes in the novel are death and living in a corrupted society , and critics have compared them to Christian allegories .
Generally well-received , the book won the 2008 Colorado Blue Spruce Book Award , and the American Library Association named it a `` Best Book for Young Adults '' .
A two-part film adaptation began showing in November 2010 when Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows -- Part 1 was released ; Part 2 was released on 15 July 2011 .