Harvard University is a private Ivy League research university in Cambridge , Massachusetts , established in 1636 , whose history , influence , and wealth have made it one of the world 's most prestigious universities .
Established originally by the Massachusetts legislature and soon thereafter named for John Harvard -LRB- its first benefactor -RRB- , Harvard is the United States ' oldest institution of higher learning , and the Harvard Corporation -LRB- formally , the President and Fellows of Harvard College -RRB- is its first chartered corporation .
Although never formally affiliated with any denomination , the early College primarily trained Congregationalist and Unitarian clergy .
Its curriculum and student body were gradually secularized during the 18th century , and by the 19th century Harvard had emerged as the central cultural establishment among Boston elites .
Following the American Civil War , President Charles W. Eliot 's long tenure -LRB- 1869 -- 1909 -RRB- transformed the college and affiliated professional schools into a modern research university ; Harvard was a founding member of the Association of American Universities in 1900 .
James Bryant Conant led the university through the Great Depression and World War II and began to reform the curriculum and liberalize admissions after the war .
The undergraduate college became coeducational after its 1977 merger with Radcliffe College .
The university is organized into eleven separate academic units -- ten faculties and the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study -- with campuses throughout the Boston metropolitan area : its 209 acre main campus is centered on Harvard Yard in Cambridge , approximately 3 mi northwest of Boston ; the business school and athletics facilities , including Harvard Stadium , are located across the Charles River in the Allston neighborhood of Boston and the medical , dental , and public health schools are in the Longwood Medical Area .
Harvard 's $ 34.5 billion financial endowment is the largest of any academic institution .
Harvard is a large , highly residential research university .
The nominal cost of attendance is high , but the university 's large endowment allows it to offer generous financial aid packages .
It operates several arts , cultural , and scientific museums , alongside the Harvard Library , which is the world 's largest academic and private library system , comprising 79 individual libraries with over 18 million volumes .
Harvard 's alumni include eight U.S. presidents , several foreign heads of state , 62 living billionaires , 359 Rhodes Scholars , and 242 Marshall Scholars .
To date , some 130 Nobel laureates , 18 Fields Medalists , and 13 Turing Award winners have been affiliated as students , faculty , or staff .