Harvey Kurtzman -LRB- -LSB- ˈkɜrtsmən -RSB- October 3 , 1924 -- February 21 , 1993 -RRB- was an American cartoonist and editor .
His best-known work includes writing and editing the parodic comic book Mad from 1952 until 1956 , and writing the Little Annie Fanny strips in Playboy from 1962 until 1988 .
His work is noted for its satire and parody of popular culture , social critique , and attention to detail .
Kurtzman 's working method has been likened to that of an auteur , and he expected those who illustrated his stories to follow his layouts strictly .
Kurtzman began to work on the New Trend line of comic books at EC Comics ' in 1950 .
He wrote and edited the Two-Fisted Tales and Frontline Combat war comic books , where he also drew many of the carefully researched stories , before he created his most-remembered comic book , Mad , in 1952 .
Kurtzman scripted the stories and had them drawn by top EC cartoonists , most frequently Will Elder , Wally Wood , and Jack Davis ; the early Mad was noted for its social critique and parodies of pop culture .
The comic book switched to a magazine format in 1955 , and Kurtzman left it in 1956 over a dispute with EC 's owner William Gaines over financial control .
Following his departure , he did a variety of cartooning work , including editing the short-lived Trump and the self-published Humbug .
In 1959 , he produced the first book-length work of original comics , the adult-oriented , satirical Jungle Book .
He edited the low-budget Help !
from 1960 to 1965 , a humor magazine which featured work by future Monty Python member Terry Gilliam and the earliest work of underground cartoonists such as Robert Crumb and Gilbert Shelton .
He brought Help !
to an end after the success of the risqué Playboy feature Little Annie Fanny began to take up his time .
While Annie Fanny provided much of his income for the rest of his career , he continued to produce an eclectic body of work , including screenwriting the animated Mad Monster Party ?
in 1967 and directing , writing and designing several shorts for Sesame Street in 1969 .
From 1973 , Kurtzman taught cartooning at the School of Visual Arts in New York .
His work gained greater recognition toward the end of his life , and he oversaw deluxe reprintings of much of his work .
The Harvey Award was named in Kurtzman 's honor in 1988 .
He was inducted into the Will Eisner Comic Book Hall of Fame in 1989 , and his work earned five positions on The Comics Journals Top 100 Comics of the 20th Century .