A hate group is a social group that advocates and practices hatred , hostility , or violence towards members of a race , ethnicity , nation , religion , gender , gender identity , sexual orientation or any other designated sector of society .
According to the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation -LRB- FBI -RRB- , a hate group 's `` primary purpose is to promote animosity , hostility , and malice against persons belonging to a race , religion , disability , sexual orientation , or ethnicity/national origin which differs from that of the members of the organization . ''
Scholars find it difficult to define the term hate group and `` whether a particular group is to be classified as a hate group is sometimes in the eye of the beholder . ''
In the US , two private organizations that monitor intolerance and hate groups are the Anti-Defamation League -LRB- ADL -RRB- and the Southern Poverty Law Center -LRB- SPLC -RRB- .
They maintain lists of what they deem to be hate groups , supremacist groups and anti-Semitic , anti-government or extremist groups that have committed hate crimes .
The SPLC 's definition of a `` hate group '' includes any group with beliefs or practices that attack or malign an entire class of people -- particularly when the characteristics being maligned are immutable .
However , at least for the SPLC , inclusion of a group in the list `` does not imply a group advocates or engages in violence or other criminal activity . ''
According to the SPLC , from 2000 to 2008 , hate group activity saw a 50 percent increase in the US , with a total of 926 active groups .
Recently the term alt-right , short for `` alternative right , '' has come into usage .
This broad term includes a range of people who reject mainstream conservatism in favor of forms of conservatism that embrace implicit or explicit racism or white supremacy .
The alt-right is described as `` a weird mix of old-school neo-Nazis , conspiracy theorists , anti-globalists , and young right-wing internet trolls -- all united in the belief that white male identity is under attack by multicultural , `` politically correct '' forces . ''
The FBI does not publish a list of hate groups , and '' -LSB- I -RSB- nvestigations are conducted only when a threat or advocacy of force is made ; when the group has the apparent ability to carry out the proclaimed act ; and when the act would constitute a potential violation of federal law .
The FBI maintains statistics on hate crimes .