Hearing loss , also known as hearing impairment , is a partial or total inability to hear .
A deaf person has little to no hearing .
Hearing loss may occur in one or both ears .
In children hearing problems can affect the ability to learn spoken language and in adults it can cause work related difficulties .
In some people , particularly older people , hearing loss can result in loneliness .
Hearing loss can be temporary or permanent .
Hearing loss may be caused by a number of factors , including : genetics , ageing , exposure to noise , some infections , birth complications , trauma to the ear , and certain medications or toxins .
A common condition that results in hearing loss is chronic ear infections .
Certain infections during pregnancy such as syphilis and rubella may also cause hearing loss .
Hearing loss is diagnosed when hearing testing finds that a person is unable to hear 25 decibels in at least one ear .
Testing for poor hearing is recommended for all newborns .
Hearing loss can be categorised as mild , moderate , moderate-severe , severe , or profound .
There are three main types of hearing loss , conductive hearing loss , sensorineural hearing loss , and mixed hearing loss .
Half of hearing loss is preventable .
This includes by immunization , proper care around pregnancy , avoiding loud noise , and avoiding certain medications .
The World Health Organization recommends that young people limit the use of personal audio players to an hour a day in an effort to limit exposure to noise .
Early identification and support are particularly important in children .
For many hearing aids , sign language , cochlear implants and subtitles are useful .
Lip reading is another useful skill some develop .
Access to hearing aids , however , is limited in many areas of the world .
As of 2013 hearing loss affects about 1.1 billion people to some degree .
It causes disability in 5 % -LRB- 360 to 538 million -RRB- and moderate to severe disability in 124 million people .
Of those with moderate to severe disability 108 million live in low and middle income countries .
Of those with hearing loss it began in 65 million during childhood .
Those who use sign language and are members of Deaf culture see themselves as having a difference rather than an illness .
Most members of Deaf culture oppose attempts to cure deafness and some within this community view cochlear implants with concern as they have the potential to eliminate their culture .
The term hearing impairment is often viewed negatively as it emphasises what people can not do .