The heart is a muscular organ in humans and other animals , which pumps blood through the blood vessels of the circulatory system .
Blood provides the body with oxygen and nutrients , as well as assists in the removal of metabolic wastes .
In humans , the heart is located between the lungs , in the middle compartment of the chest .
In humans , other mammals , and birds , the heart is divided into four chambers : upper left and right atria ; and lower left and right ventricles .
Commonly the right atrium and ventricle are referred together as the right heart and their left counterparts as the left heart .
Fish , in contrast , have two chambers , an atrium and a ventricle , while reptiles have three chambers .
In a healthy heart blood flows one way through the heart due to heart valves , which prevent backflow .
The heart is enclosed in a protective sac , the pericardium , which also contains a small amount of fluid .
The wall of the heart is made up of three layers : epicardium , myocardium , and endocardium .
The heart pumps blood with a rhythm determined by a group of pacemaking cells in the sinoatrial node .
These generate a current that causes contraction of the heart , traveling through the atrioventricular node and along the conduction system of the heart .
The heart receives blood low in oxygen from the systemic circulation , which enters the right atrium from the superior and inferior venae cavae and passes to the right ventricle .
From here it is pumped into the pulmonary circulation , through the lungs where it receives oxygen and gives off carbon dioxide .
Oxygenated blood then returns to the left atrium , passes through the left ventricle and is pumped out through the aorta to the systemic circulation − where the oxygen is used and metabolized to carbon dioxide .
The heart beats at a resting rate close to 72 beats per minute .
Exercise temporarily increases the rate , but lowers resting heart rate in the long term , and is good for heart health .
Cardiovascular diseases -LRB- CVD -RRB- are the most common cause of death globally as of 2008 , accounting for 30 % of deaths .
Of these more than three quarters are a result of coronary artery disease and stroke .
Risk factors include : smoking , being overweight , little exercise , high cholesterol , high blood pressure , and poorly controlled diabetes , among others .
Cardiovascular diseases frequently have no symptoms or may cause chest pain or shortness of breath .
Diagnosis of heart disease is often done by the taking of a medical history , listening to the heart-sounds with a stethoscope , ECG , and ultrasound .
Specialists who focus on diseases of the heart are called cardiologists , although many specialties of medicine may be involved in treatment .