Henry III -LRB- 19 September 1551 -- 2 August 1589 ; born Alexandre Édouard de France , Henryk Walezy , Henrikas Valua -RRB- was a monarch of the House of Valois who was elected the monarch of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth from 1573 to 1575 and ruled as King of France from 1574 until his death .
He was the last French monarch of the Valois dynasty .
As the fourth son of King Henry II of France and Catherine de ' Medici , Henry was not expected to assume the throne of France .
He was thus a good candidate for the vacant Commonwealth throne , and he was elected with the dual titles King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania .
Henry 's rule over the Commonwealth was brief , but notable .
The Henrician Articles he signed into law accepting the Commonwealth throne established Poland as an elective monarchy subject to free election by the Polish nobility .
Of his three older brothers , two would live long enough to ascend the French throne , but both died young and without a legitimate male heir .
He abandoned Commonwealth upon receiving word that he had inherited the throne of France at the age of 22 .
The kingdom of France was at the time plagued by the Wars of Religion , and Henry 's authority was undermined by violent political parties funded by foreign powers : the Catholic League -LRB- supported by Spain -RRB- , the Protestant Huguenots -LRB- supported by England and the Dutch -RRB- and the Malcontents , led by Henry 's own brother , the Duke of Alençon , which was a party of Catholic and Protestant aristocrats who jointly opposed the absolutist ambitions of the king .
Henry III was himself a politique , arguing that a strong and religiously tolerant monarchy would save France from collapse .
After the death of Henry 's younger brother Francis , Duke of Anjou , and when it became apparent that Henry would not produce an heir , the Wars of Religion grew into a succession crisis that resulted in a war known as the War of the Three Henrys .
Henry III 's legitimate heir was his distant cousin Henry , King of Navarre , a Protestant .
The Catholic League , led by Henry I , Duke of Guise , sought to exclude Protestants from the succession and championed the Catholic Charles , Cardinal of Bourbon , as Henry III 's heir .
In 1589 , Jacques Clément , a Catholic fanatic , murdered Henry III , who was succeeded by the King of Navarre who , as Henry IV , would assume the throne of France after converting to Catholicism , and become the first French king of the House of Bourbon .