Henry III -LRB- 1 October 1207 -- 16 November 1272 -RRB- , also known as Henry of Winchester , was King of England , Lord of Ireland and Duke of Aquitaine from 1216 until his death .
The son of King John and Isabella of Angoulême , Henry assumed the throne when he was only nine in the middle of the First Barons ' War .
Cardinal Guala declared the war against the rebel barons to be a religious crusade and Henry 's forces , led by William Marshal , defeated the rebels at the battles of Lincoln and Sandwich in 1217 .
Henry promised to abide by the Great Charter of 1225 , which limited royal power and protected the rights of the major barons .
His early rule was dominated first by Hubert de Burgh and then Peter des Roches , who re-established royal authority after the war .
In 1230 the King attempted to reconquer the provinces of France that had once belonged to his father , but the invasion was a debacle .
A revolt led by William Marshal 's son , Richard , broke out in 1232 , ending in a peace settlement negotiated by the Church .
Following the revolt , Henry ruled England personally , rather than governing through senior ministers .
He travelled less than previous monarchs , investing heavily in a handful of his favourite palaces and castles .
He married Eleanor of Provence , with whom he had five children .
Henry was known for his piety , holding lavish religious ceremonies and giving generously to charities ; the King was particularly devoted to the figure of Edward the Confessor , whom he adopted as his patron saint .
He extracted huge sums of money from the Jews in England , ultimately crippling their ability to do business , and as attitudes towards the Jews hardened , he introduced the Statute of Jewry , attempting to segregate the community .
In a fresh attempt to reclaim his family 's lands in France , he invaded Poitou in 1242 , leading to the disastrous Battle of Taillebourg .
After this , Henry relied on diplomacy , cultivating an alliance with Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II .
Henry supported his brother Richard in his bid to become King of the Romans in 1256 , but was unable to place his own son Edmund on the throne of Sicily , despite investing large amounts of money .
He planned to go on crusade to the Levant , but was prevented from doing so by rebellions in Gascony .
By 1258 , Henry 's rule was increasingly unpopular , the result of the failure of his expensive foreign policies and the notoriety of his Poitevin half-brothers , the Lusignans , as well as the role of his local officials in collecting taxes and debts .
A coalition of his barons , initially probably backed by Eleanor , seized power in a coup d'état and expelled the Poitevins from England , reforming the royal government through a process called the Provisions of Oxford .
Henry and the baronial government enacted a peace with France in 1259 , under which Henry gave up his rights to his other lands in France in return for King Louis IX of France recognising him as the rightful ruler of Gascony .
The baronial regime collapsed but Henry was unable to reform a stable government and instability across England continued .
In 1263 one of the more radical barons , Simon de Montfort , seized power , resulting in the Second Barons ' War .
Henry persuaded Louis to support his cause and mobilised an army .
The Battle of Lewes occurred in 1264 , where Henry was defeated and taken prisoner .
Henry 's eldest son , Edward , escaped from captivity to defeat de Montfort at the Battle of Evesham the following year and freed his father .
Henry initially enacted a harsh revenge on the remaining rebels , but was persuaded by the Church to mollify his policies through the Dictum of Kenilworth .
Reconstruction was slow and Henry had to acquiesce to various measures , including further suppression of the Jews , to maintain baronial and popular support .
Henry died in 1272 , leaving Edward as his successor .
He was buried in Westminster Abbey , which he had rebuilt in the second half of his reign , and was moved to his current tomb in 1290 .
Some miracles were declared after his death but he was not canonised .