Heroes is an American psychological thriller science fiction television drama series created by Tim Kring that appeared on NBC for four seasons from September 25 , 2006 through February 8 , 2010 .
The series tells the stories of ordinary people who discover that they had superhuman abilities , and how these abilities take effect in the characters ' lives as they work together to prevent catastrophic futures .
The series emulates the aesthetic style and storytelling of American comic books , using multi-episode story arcs that build upon a larger , more encompassing narrative .
The series was produced by Tailwind Productions in association with Universal Media Studios .
It was filmed primarily in Los Angeles , California .
Four complete seasons aired , ending on February 8 , 2010 .
The critically acclaimed first season had a run of 23 episodes and garnered an average of 14.3 million viewers in the United States , receiving the highest rating for an NBC drama premiere in five years .
The second season of Heroes attracted an average of 13.1 million viewers in the U.S. , and marked NBC 's sole series among the top 20 ranked programs in total viewership for the 2007 -- 2008 season .
Heroes has earned a number of awards and nominations , including Primetime Emmy Awards , Golden Globes , People 's Choice Awards , and British Academy Television Awards .
An online extension of the series , Heroes 360 Experience , later rebranded as Heroes Evolutions , was created to explore the Heroes universe and provides insight into the show 's mythology .
Other official Heroes media include magazines , action figures , tie-in and interactive websites , a mobile game , a novel , clothing and other merchandise .
In the fall of 2008 , NBC Digital Entertainment released a series of online content for the summer , including more original web content , wireless iTV interactivity , graphic novels available for mobile viewing and webisodes .
A 13-episode miniseries entitled Heroes Reborn premiered on NBC on September 24 , 2015 .
Additionally , comic book writer Cullen Bunn will be writing an ongoing comic book continuing Heroes , called Heroes : Season Five ; a release date and artist has yet to be determined .