Hinduism is a religion , or a way of life , found most notably in India and Nepal .
Hinduism has been called the oldest religion in the world , and some practitioners and scholars refer to it as , `` the eternal law , '' or the `` eternal way , '' beyond human origins .
Scholars regard Hinduism as a fusion or synthesis of various Indian cultures and traditions , with diverse roots and no founder .
This `` Hindu synthesis '' started to develop between 500 BCE and 300 CE following the Vedic period -LRB- 1500 BCE to 500 BCE -RRB- .
Although Hinduism contains a broad range of philosophies , it is linked by shared concepts , recognisable rituals , cosmology , shared textual resources , and pilgrimage to sacred sites .
Hindu texts are classified into Shruti -LRB- `` heard '' -RRB- and Smriti -LRB- `` remembered '' -RRB- .
These texts discuss theology , philosophy , mythology , Vedic yajna , Yoga , agamic rituals , and temple building , among other topics .
Major scriptures include the Vedas and Upanishads , the Bhagavad Gita , and the Agamas .
Sources of authority and eternal truths in its texts play an important role , but there is also a strong Hindu tradition of the questioning of this authority , to deepen the understanding of these truths and to further develop the tradition .
Prominent themes in Hindu beliefs include the four Puruṣārthas , the proper goals or aims of human life , namely Dharma -LRB- ethics/duties -RRB- , Artha -LRB- prosperity/work -RRB- , Kama -LRB- desires/passions -RRB- and Moksha -LRB- liberation/freedom/salvation -RRB- ; karma -LRB- action , intent and consequences -RRB- , samsara -LRB- cycle of rebirth -RRB- , and the various Yogas -LRB- paths or practices to attain moksha -RRB- .
Hindu practices include rituals such as puja -LRB- worship -RRB- and recitations , meditation , family-oriented rites of passage , annual festivals , and occasional pilgrimages .
Some Hindus leave their social world and material possessions , then engage in lifelong Sannyasa -LRB- monastic practices -RRB- to achieve Moksha .
Hinduism prescribes the eternal duties , such as honesty , refraining from injuring living beings -LRB- ahimsa -RRB- , patience , forbearance , self-restraint , and compassion , among others .
Hinduism is the world 's third largest religion , with over one billion followers or 15 % of the global population , known as Hindus .
The majority of Hindus reside in India , Nepal , Mauritius , the Caribbean , and Bali in Indonesia .