The history of Earth concerns the development of the planet Earth from its formation to the present day .
Nearly all branches of natural science have contributed to the understanding of the main events of the Earth 's past .
The age of Earth is approximately one-third of the age of the universe .
An immense amount of geological change has occurred in that timespan , accompanied by the emergence of life and its subsequent evolution .
Earth formed around 4.54 billion years ago by accretion from the solar nebula .
Volcanic outgassing probably created the primordial atmosphere and then the ocean ; but the atmosphere contained almost no oxygen and so would have been toxic to most modern life including humans .
Much of the Earth was molten because of frequent collisions with other bodies which led to extreme volcanism .
A giant impact collision with a planet-sized body named Theia while Earth was in its earliest stage , also known as Early Earth , is thought to have been responsible for forming the Moon .
Over time , the Earth cooled , causing the formation of a solid crust , and allowing liquid water to exist on the surface .
The geological time scale -LRB- GTS -RRB- clock -LRB- see graphic -RRB- depicts the larger spans of time from the beginning of the Earth as well as a chronology of some definitive events of Earth history .
The Hadean Eon represents time before the reliable -LRB- fossil -RRB- record of life beginning on Earth ; it began with the formation of the planet and ended at 4.0 billion years ago as defined by international convention .
The Archean and Proterozoic eons follow ; they produced the abiogenesis of life on Earth and then the evolution of early life .
The succeeding eon is the Phanerozoic , which is represented by its three component eras : the Palaeozoic ; the Mesozoic , which spanned the rise , reign , and climactic extinction of the huge dinosaurs ; and the Cenozoic , which presented the subsequent development of dominant mammals on Earth .
Hominins , the earliest direct ancestors of the human clade , rose sometime during the latter part of the Miocene epoch ; the precise time marking the first hominins is broadly debated over a current range of 13 to 4 mya .
The succeeding Quaternary period is the time of recognizable humans , i.e. , the genus Homo , but that period 's two million-year-plus term of the recent times is too small to be visible at the scale of the GTS graphic .
-LRB- Notes re the graphic : Ga means `` billion years '' ; Ma , `` million years '' . -RRB-
The earliest undisputed evidence of life on Earth dates at least from 3.5 billion years ago , during the Eoarchean Era after a geological crust started to solidify following the earlier molten Hadean Eon .
There are microbial mat fossils such as stromatolites found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone discovered in Western Australia .
Other early physical evidence of a biogenic substance is graphite in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks discovered in southwestern Greenland as well as `` remains of biotic life '' found in 4.1 billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia .
According to one of the researchers , `` If life arose relatively quickly on Earth ... then it could be common in the universe . ''
Living forms derived from photosynthesis appeared between 3.2 and 2.4 billion years ago and began enriching the atmosphere with oxygen .
Life remained mostly small and microscopic until about 580 million years ago , when complex multicellular life arose , developed over time , and culminated in the Cambrian Explosion about 541 million years ago .
This event drove a rapid diversification of life forms on Earth that produced most of the major phyla known today ; and it marked the end of the Proterozoic Eon and the beginning of the Cambrian Period of the Paleozoic Era .
More than 99 percent of all species , amounting to over five billion species , that ever lived on Earth are estimated to be extinct .
Estimates on the number of Earth 's current species range from 10 million to 14 million , of which about 1.2 million have been documented and over 86 percent have not yet been described .
More recently , in May 2016 , scientists reported that 1 trillion species are estimated to be on Earth currently with only one-thousandth of one percent described .
Geological change has been a constant of Earth 's crust since the time of its formation , and biological change since the first appearance of life .
Species continue to evolve , taking on new forms , splitting into daughter species or going extinct in the process of adapting or dying in response to ever-changing physical environments .
The process of plate tectonics continues to play a dominant role in the shaping of Earth 's oceans and continents and the living species they harbor .
Changes in the biosphere -- now dominated by human activity -- continue , in turn , to produce significant effects on the atmosphere and other systems of the Earth 's surface , such as the integrity of the ozone layer , the proliferation of greenhouse gases , the conditions of productive soils and clean air and water , and others .