The horse -LRB- Equus ferus caballus -RRB- is one of two extant subspecies of Equus ferus .
It is an odd-toed ungulate mammal belonging to the taxonomic family Equidae .
The horse has evolved over the past 45 to 55 million years from a small multi-toed creature , Eohippus , into the large , single-toed animal of today .
Humans began to domesticate horses around 4000 BC , and their domestication is believed to have been widespread by 3000 BC .
Horses in the subspecies caballus are domesticated , although some domesticated populations live in the wild as feral horses .
These feral populations are not true wild horses , as this term is used to describe horses that have never been domesticated , such as the endangered Przewalski 's horse , a separate subspecies , and the only remaining true wild horse .
There is an extensive , specialized vocabulary used to describe equine-related concepts , covering everything from anatomy to life stages , size , colors , markings , breeds , locomotion , and behavior .
Horses ' anatomy enables them to make use of speed to escape predators and they have a well-developed sense of balance and a strong fight-or-flight response .
Related to this need to flee from predators in the wild is an unusual trait : horses are able to sleep both standing up and lying down .
Female horses , called mares , carry their young for approximately 11 months , and a young horse , called a foal , can stand and run shortly following birth .
Most domesticated horses begin training under saddle or in harness between the ages of two and four .
They reach full adult development by age five , and have an average lifespan of between 25 and 30 years .
Horse breeds are loosely divided into three categories based on general temperament : spirited `` hot bloods '' with speed and endurance ; `` cold bloods '' , such as draft horses and some ponies , suitable for slow , heavy work ; and `` warmbloods '' , developed from crosses between hot bloods and cold bloods , often focusing on creating breeds for specific riding purposes , particularly in Europe .
There are more than 300 breeds of horse in the world today , developed for many different uses .
Horses and humans interact in a wide variety of sport competitions and non-competitive recreational pursuits , as well as in working activities such as police work , agriculture , entertainment , and therapy .
Horses were historically used in warfare , from which a wide variety of riding and driving techniques developed , using many different styles of equipment and methods of control .
Many products are derived from horses , including meat , milk , hide , hair , bone , and pharmaceuticals extracted from the urine of pregnant mares .
Humans provide domesticated horses with food , water and shelter , as well as attention from specialists such as veterinarians and farriers .