House of 1000 Corpses is a 2003 American exploitation horror film written , co-scored and directed by Rob Zombie in his directorial debut .
The film stars Sid Haig , Bill Moseley , Sheri Moon , and Karen Black as members of the Firefly family .
Set on Halloween , the film sees the Firefly family torturing and mutilating a group of teenagers who are traveling across the country writing a book .
The film explores a number of genres , and features elements of the supernatural .
Zombie cited American horror films The Texas Chain Saw Massacre -LRB- 1974 -RRB- and The Hills Have Eyes -LRB- 1977 -RRB- as influences on House of 1000 Corpses , as well as other films released during the 1970s .
Initially filmed in 2000 , House of 1000 Corpses was purchased by Universal Pictures , thus a large portion of it was filmed on the Universal Studios backlots .
The film was made with a budget of $ 7 million .
Zombie worked with Scott Humphrey on the score of the film .
House of 1000 Corpses featured a graphic amount of blood and gore , and controversial scenes involving masturbation and necrophilia .
The project was ultimately shelved by the company prior to its release due to fears of an NC-17 rating .
Zombie later managed to re-purchase the rights to the work , eventually selling it to Lions Gate Entertainment .
The film received a theatrical release on April 11 , 2003 , nearly three years after filming had concluded .
House of 1000 Corpses received a generally negative reaction following its release .
The film was critically panned , with the film 's various side-plots and main cast being criticized by multiple critics .
The film earned over $ 3 million in its opening weekend , and would later go on to gross over $ 16 million worldwide .
Despite its initial negative reception , the film went on to develop a cult following .
Zombie later directed the film 's sequel , The Devil 's Rejects -LRB- 2005 -RRB- , in which the Firefly family are on the run from the police .
Zombie later developed a haunted house attraction for Universal Studios Hollywood based on the film .
This would be the final film performance of Dennis Fimple , before his death in August 2002 .
The film was dedicated to his memory .