House -LRB- also called House , M.D. -RRB- is an American television medical drama that originally ran on the Fox network for eight seasons , from November 16 , 2004 to May 21 , 2012 .
The series ' main character is Dr. Gregory House -LRB- Hugh Laurie -RRB- , an unconventional , misanthropic medical genius who , despite his dependence on pain medication , leads a team of diagnosticians at the fictional Princeton -- Plainsboro Teaching Hospital -LRB- PPTH -RRB- in New Jersey .
The series ' premise originated with Paul Attanasio , while David Shore , who is credited as creator , was primarily responsible for the conception of the title character .
The series ' executive producers included Shore , Attanasio , Attanasio 's business partner Katie Jacobs , and film director Bryan Singer .
It was filmed largely in Century City .
House often clashes with his fellow physicians , including his own diagnostic team , because many of his hypotheses about patients ' illnesses are based on subtle or controversial insights .
His flouting of hospital rules and procedures frequently leads him into conflict with his boss , hospital administrator and Dean of Medicine Dr. Lisa Cuddy -LRB- Lisa Edelstein -RRB- .
House 's only true friend is Dr. James Wilson -LRB- Robert Sean Leonard -RRB- , head of the Department of Oncology .
During the first three seasons , House 's diagnostic team consists of Dr. Robert Chase -LRB- Jesse Spencer -RRB- , Dr. Allison Cameron -LRB- Jennifer Morrison -RRB- , and Dr. Eric Foreman -LRB- Omar Epps -RRB- .
At the end of the third season , this team disbands .
Rejoined by Foreman , House gradually selects three new team members : Dr. Remy `` Thirteen '' Hadley -LRB- Olivia Wilde -RRB- , Dr. Chris Taub -LRB- Peter Jacobson -RRB- , and Dr. Lawrence Kutner -LRB- Kal Penn -RRB- .
Kutner makes an appearance late in season five and then reappears in season 8 episode 22 .
Chase and Cameron continue to appear in different roles at the hospital until early in season six .
Cameron then departs the hospital , and Chase returns to the diagnostic team .
Thirteen takes a leave of absence for most of season seven , and her position is filled by medical student Martha M. Masters -LRB- Amber Tamblyn -RRB- .
Cuddy and Masters depart before season eight ; Foreman becomes the new Dean of Medicine , while Dr. Jessica Adams -LRB- Odette Annable -RRB- and Dr. Chi Park -LRB- Charlyne Yi -RRB- join House 's team .
House was among the top 10 series in the United States from its second through fourth seasons .
Distributed to 66 countries , House was the most-watched television program in the world in 2008 .
The show received numerous awards , including five Primetime Emmy Awards , two Golden Globe Awards , a Peabody Award , and nine People 's Choice Awards .
On February 8 , 2012 , Fox announced that the eighth season , then in progress , would be its last .
The series finale aired on May 21 , 2012 , following an hour-long retrospective .