How to Train Your Dragon 2 is a 2014 American 3D computer-animated fantasy action film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by 20th Century Fox , loosely based on the British book series of the same name by Cressida Cowell .
It is the sequel to the 2010 computer-animated film How to Train Your Dragon and the second in the trilogy .
The film is written and directed by Dean DeBlois , and stars the voices of Jay Baruchel , Gerard Butler , Craig Ferguson , America Ferrera , Jonah Hill , Christopher Mintz-Plasse , T.J. Miller , and Kristen Wiig , with the addition of Cate Blanchett , Djimon Hounsou , and Kit Harington .
The film takes place five years after the first film , featuring Hiccup and his friends as young adults as they meet Valka , Hiccup 's long-lost mother , and Drago Bludvist , a madman who wants to conquer the world .
DeBlois , who co-directed the first film , agreed to return to direct the second film on the condition that he would be allowed to turn it into a trilogy .
He cited The Empire Strikes Back and My Neighbor Totoro as his main inspirations , with the expanded scope of the The Empire Strikes Back being particularly influential .
The entire voice cast from the first film returned , and Cate Blanchett and Djimon Hounsou signed on to voice Valka and Drago , respectively .
DeBlois and his creative team visited Norway and Svalbard to give them ideas for the setting .
Composer John Powell returned to score the film .
How to Train Your Dragon 2 benefited from advances in animation technology and was DreamWorks ' first film to use scalable multicore processing and the studio 's new animation and lighting software .
The film was released on June 13 , 2014 , and like its predecessor , received wide acclaim .
Critics praised the film for its animation , voice acting , action scenes , musical score , emotional depth , and darker , more serious tone compared to its predecessor .
It received the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Animated Feature .
The film won six Annie Awards , including Best Animated Feature and Best Director .
The film grossed over $ 621 million worldwide , making it the 12th highest-grossing film of 2014 .
It earned less than its predecessor at the US box office , but performed better internationally .
A third installment in the trilogy , How to Train Your Dragon 3 , is scheduled to be released on March 1 , 2019 .