Hugh John Mungo Grant -LRB- born 9 September 1960 -RRB- is an English actor and film producer .
Grant has received a Golden Globe , a BAFTA , and an Honorary César for his work .
His films have earned more than US$ 2.4 billion from 25 theatrical releases worldwide .
Grant first received attention after earning the Volpi Cup for his performance in James Ivory 's Maurice -LRB- 1987 -RRB- but achieved international success after appearing in the Richard Curtis-scripted Four Weddings and a Funeral -LRB- 1994 -RRB- .
Grant used this breakthrough role as a frequent cinematic persona during the 1990s , delivering comic performances in films such as Mickey Blue Eyes -LRB- 1999 -RRB- and Notting Hill -LRB- 1999 -RRB- .
One of the best known figures in 1990s British popular culture , Grant was in a high-profile relationship with Elizabeth Hurley , which was the focus of much attention in the British and international media .
By the turn of the 21st century , Grant had established himself as a leading man , skilled with a satirical comic talent .
Grant has expanded his oeuvre with critically acclaimed turns as a cad in Bridget Jones 's Diary -LRB- 2001 -RRB- , About a Boy -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , and American Dreamz -LRB- 2006 -RRB- .
Grant later played against type with multiple cameo roles in the epic sci-fi drama film , Cloud Atlas -LRB- 2012 -RRB- .
He 's also known for appearing in period pieces such as The Remains of the Day -LRB- 1993 -RRB- , Sense and Sensibility -LRB- 1995 -RRB- and Florence Foster Jenkins -LRB- 2016 -RRB- .
Within the film industry , Grant is cited as an anti-star who approaches his roles like a character actor , and attempts to make his acting appear spontaneous .
Hallmarks of his comic skills include a nonchalant touch of irony/sarcasm and studied physical mannerisms , as well as his precisely-timed dialogue delivery and facial expressions .
The entertainment media 's coverage of Grant 's life off the big screen has often overshadowed his work as an actor .
Grant has been outspoken about his antipathy towards the profession of acting , and in his disdain towards the culture of celebrity and hostility towards the media .
In a career spanning 30 years , Grant has repeatedly claimed that acting was not his true calling , but rather a career that unintentionally developed by happenstance .