The Hulk is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics .
Created by writer Stan Lee and artist Jack Kirby , the character first appeared in the debut issue of The Incredible Hulk -LRB- May 1962 -RRB- .
In his comic book appearances , the character is both the Hulk , a green-skinned , hulking and muscular humanoid possessing a vast degree of physical strength , and his alter ego Bruce Banner , a physically weak , socially withdrawn , and emotionally reserved physicist , the two existing as personalities independent and resenting of the other .
Following his accidental exposure to gamma radiation during the detonation of an experimental bomb , Banner is physically transformed into the Hulk when subjected to emotional stress , at or against his will , often leading to destructive rampages and conflicts that complicate Banner 's civilian life .
The Hulk 's level of strength is normally conveyed as proportionate to his level of anger .
Commonly portrayed as a raging savage , the Hulk has been represented with other personalities based on Banner 's fractured psyche , from a mindless , destructive force , to a brilliant warrior , or genius scientist in his own right .
Despite both Hulk and Banner 's desire for solitude , the character has a large supporting cast , including Banner 's lover Betty Ross , his friend Rick Jones , his cousin She-Hulk , sons Hiro-Kala and Skaar , and his co-founders of the superhero team the Avengers .
However , his uncontrollable power has brought him into conflict with his fellow heroes and others .
Lee stated that the Hulk 's creation was inspired by a combination of Frankenstein and Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde .
Although the Hulk 's coloration has varied throughout the character 's publication history , the most usual color is green .
He has two main catchphrases : `` Hulk is strongest one there is ! ''
and the better-known `` HULK SMASH ! ''
, which has founded the basis for numerous pop culture memes .
One of the most iconic characters in popular culture , the character has appeared on a variety of merchandise , such as clothing and collectable items , inspired real-world structures -LRB- such as theme park attractions -RRB- , and been referenced in a number of media .
Banner and the Hulk have been adapted in live-action , animated , and video game incarnations , including the 1970s The Incredible Hulk television series -LRB- played by Bill Bixby and Lou Ferrigno respectively -RRB- and in film by Eric Bana , Edward Norton and Mark Ruffalo .