The human brain is the central organ of the human nervous system .
The human brain , with the spinal cord , makes up the central nervous system .
The brain consists of the cerebrum , the brainstem and the cerebellum .
The brain is the organ that controls most of the activities of the body .
The brain processes , integrates , and coordinates all of the information it receives from the sense organs .
Sensory information is interpreted and analysed , and decisions are made as to the instructions transmitted to the rest of the body .
The brain is contained in , and protected by , the skull bones of the head .
The cerebrum is the largest part of the human brain .
It is divided into two cerebral hemispheres which are covered by the cerebral cortex .
The cortex is an outer layer of grey matter , that covers the core of white matter .
The cortex is split into the neocortex and the much smaller allocortex .
The neocortex is made up of six neuronal layers , and the allocortex has three or four such layers .
Each hemisphere is conventionally divided into four lobes -- the frontal , temporal , parietal , and occipital lobes .
The frontal lobe is associated with executive functions including self-control , planning , reasoning , and abstract thought , while the occipital lobe is dedicated to vision .
Within each lobe , there are also cortical areas associated with specific functions , such as the sensory , a motor and association regions .
Although the left and right hemispheres are broadly similar in shape and function , some functions are associated with a particular side of the brain , such as language in the left and visual-spatial ability in the right .
The hemispheres are connected by nerve tracts known as commisures , the largest being the corpus callosum .
The cerebrum is connected by the brainstem to the spinal cord .
The brainstem consists of the midbrain , the pons , and the medulla oblongata .
The cerebellum is connected to the brainstem by pairs of tracts known as peduncles .
Within the cerebrum is the ventricular system of the brain , which consists of four interconnected ventricles in which cerebrospinal fluid is produced and circulated .
Underneath the cerebral cortex , several important structures are located , including the thalamus , the epithalamus , the pineal gland , the hypothalamus , the pituitary gland , and the subthalamus ; the limbic structures , including the amygdala and the hippocampus ; the claustrum , the various nuclei of the basal ganglia ; the basal forebrain structures , and the three circumventricular organs .
The cells of the brain include neurons and supportive glial cells .
There are more than 86 billion neurons in the brain and a more or less equal number of other cells .
Brain activity is made possible by the interconnections of neurons that are linked together to reach their targets .
These connections form various neural networks of neural pathways and circuits .
The whole circuitry of the brain is driven by the process of neurotransmission .
The brain is protected by the skull , suspended in cerebrospinal fluid , and isolated from the bloodstream by the blood -- brain barrier .
However , the brain is still susceptible to damage , disease , and infection .
Damage can be caused by trauma , or a loss of blood supply known as a stroke .
The brain is also susceptible to degenerative disorders , such as Parkinson 's disease , forms of dementia including Alzheimer 's disease , and multiple sclerosis .
A number of psychiatric conditions , including schizophrenia and clinical depression , are thought to be associated with brain dysfunctions , although the nature of these is not well understood .
The brain can also be the site of tumours , both benign and malignant .
Malignant tumours mostly originate from sites outside the brain .
The study of the anatomy of the brain is neuroanatomy , while the study of its function is neuroscience .
A number of different techniques are used to study the brain .
Brain specimens from other animals , which may be examined microscopically , have been a traditional source of much information .
Medical imaging technologies such as functional neuroimaging and electroencephalography -LRB- EEG -RRB- recordings are important techniques in studying the brain .
Examining the medical history of people with brain injury has also provided great insight into the function of each part of the brain .