The Hundred Years ' War was a series of conflicts waged from 1337 to 1453 by the House of Plantagenet , rulers of the Kingdom of England , against the House of Valois , rulers of the Kingdom of France , over the succession of the French throne .
Each side drew many allies into the war .
It was one of the most notable conflicts of the Middle Ages , in which five generations of kings from two rival dynasties fought for the throne of the largest kingdom in Western Europe .
The war marked both the height of chivalry and its subsequent decline , and the development of strong national identities in both countries .
After the Norman Conquest , the kings of England were vassals of the kings of France for their possessions in France .
The French kings had endeavored , over the centuries , to reduce these possessions , to the effect that only Gascony was left to the English .
The confiscation or threat of confiscating this duchy had been part of French policy to check the growth of English power , particularly whenever the English were at war with the Kingdom of Scotland , an ally of France .
Through his mother , Isabella of France , Edward III of England was the grandson of Philip IV of France and nephew of Charles IV of France , the last king of the senior line of the House of Capet .
In 1316 , a principle was established denying women succession to the French throne .
When Charles IV died in 1328 , Isabella , unable to claim the French throne for herself , claimed it for her son .
The French rejected the claim , maintaining that Isabella could not transmit a right that she did not possess .
For about nine years -LRB- 1328 -- 1337 -RRB- , the English had accepted the Valois succession to the French throne , but the interference of the French king , Philip VI , in Edward III 's war against Scotland permitted Edward III to reassert his claim to the French throne .
Several overwhelming English victories in the war -- especially at Crecy , Poitiers , and Agincourt -- raised the prospects of an ultimate English triumph .
However , the greater resources of the French monarchy precluded a complete conquest .
Starting in 1429 , decisive French victories at Orléans , Patay , Formigny , and Castillon concluded the war in favour of France , with England permanently losing most of its major possessions on the continent .
Historians commonly divide the war into three phases separated by truces : the Edwardian Era War -LRB- 1337 -- 1360 -RRB- ; the Caroline War -LRB- 1369 -- 1389 -RRB- ; and the Lancastrian War -LRB- 1415 -- 1453 -RRB- .
Local conflicts in neighbouring areas , which were contemporarily related to the war , including the War of the Breton Succession -LRB- 1341 -- 1364 -RRB- , the Castilian Civil War -LRB- 1366 -- 1369 -RRB- , the War of the Two Peters -LRB- 1356 -- 1375 -RRB- in Aragon , and the 1383 -- 85 Crisis in Portugal , were availed by the parties to advance their agendas .
Later historians adopted the term `` Hundred Years ' War '' as a historiography periodization to encompass all of these events , thus constructing the longest military conflict in European history .
The war owes its historical significance to multiple factors .
By its end , feudal armies had been largely replaced by professional troops , and aristocratic dominance had yielded to a democratisation of the manpower and weapons of armies .
Although primarily a dynastic conflict , the war gave impetus to ideas of French and English nationalism .
The wider introduction of weapons and tactics supplanted the feudal armies where heavy cavalry had dominated , and artillery became important .
The war precipitated the creation of the first standing armies in Western Europe since the time of the Western Roman Empire and thus helping to change their role in warfare .
With respect to the belligerents , in France , civil wars , deadly epidemics , famines , and bandit free-companies of mercenaries reduced the population drastically .
English political forces over time came to oppose the costly venture .
The dissatisfaction of English nobles , resulting from the loss of their continental landholdings , became a factor leading to the civil wars known as the Wars of the Roses -LRB- 1455 -- 1487 -RRB- .