The Hyksos -LRB- -LSB- ˈhɪksɒs -RSB- or -LSB- ˈhɪksoʊz -RSB- Egyptian heqa khaseshet , `` ruler -LRB- s -RRB- of the foreign countries '' ; Ὑκσώς , Ὑξώς -RRB- were a people of mixed origins from Western Asia , who settled in the eastern Nile Delta , some time before 1650 BC .
The arrival of the Hyksos led to the end of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt and initiated the Second Intermediate Period of Egypt .
In the context of Ancient Egypt , the term `` Asiatic '' -- which is often used for the Hyksos -- may refer to any people native to areas east of Egypt .
Immigration by Canaanite populations preceded the Hyksos .
Canaanites first appeared in Egypt towards the end of the 12th Dynasty c. 1800 BC , and either around that time or c. 1720 BC , established an independent realm in the eastern Nile Delta .
The Canaanite rulers of the Delta , regrouped in the Fourteenth Dynasty , coexisted with the Egyptian Thirteenth Dynasty , based in Itjtawy .
The power of the 13th and 14th Dynasties progressively waned , perhaps due to famine and plague .
In about 1650 BC , both dynasties were invaded by the Hyksos , who formed the Fifteenth Dynasty .
The collapse of the Thirteenth Dynasty created a power vacuum in the south , which may have led to the rise of the Sixteenth Dynasty , based in Thebes , and possibly of a local Abydos Dynasty .
The Hyksos eventually conquered both , albeit for only a short time in the case of Thebes .
From then on , the 17th Dynasty took control of Thebes and reigned for some time in peaceful coexistence with the Hyksos kings , perhaps as their vassals .
Eventually , Seqenenre Tao , Kamose and Ahmose waged war against the Hyksos and expelled Khamudi , their last king , from Egypt c. 1550 BC .
The Hyksos practiced horse burials , and their chief deity , their native storm god , Baal , became associated with the Egyptian storm and desert god , Set .
The Hyksos were a people of mixed Asiatic origin with mainly Semitic-speaking components .
Although some scholars have suggested that the Hyksos contained a Hurrian component , most other scholars have dismissed this possibility .
The Hurrians spoke an isolated language , but were under Indo-European rule and influence , and Hurrian etymologies have been suggested for some Hyksos names while Indo-European etymologies have been suggested for a very few names .
If a Hurrian component did indeed exist among the Hyksos , an Indo-European component becomes difficult to explain , as Indo-European peoples only exercised a significant influence upon Hurrians in Syria after the Hyksos were well established in Egypt .
The Hyksos brought several technical innovations to Egypt , as well as cultural infusions such as new musical instruments and foreign loanwords .
The changes introduced include new techniques of bronze working and pottery , new breeds of animals , and new crops .
In warfare , they introduced the horse and chariot , the composite bow , improved battle axes , and advanced fortification techniques .
Because of these cultural advances , Hyksos rule became decisive for Egypt 's later empire in the Middle East .