Ian Gillan -LRB- born 19 August 1945 -RRB- is an English singer and songwriter .
He originally found commercial success as the lead singer and lyricist for Deep Purple .
Initially influenced by Elvis Presley , Gillan started and fronted several local bands in the mid-sixties , and eventually joined Episode Six when their original singer left .
He first found widespread commercial success after joining Deep Purple in 1969 .
After an almost non-stop workload , during which time he recorded six albums in four years , and problematic relationships with other band members , particularly guitarist Ritchie Blackmore , Gillan resigned from the band in June 1973 , having given a lengthy notice period to their managers .
After a short time away from the music business , he resumed his music career with solo bands the Ian Gillan Band and Gillan , before a year-long stint as the vocalist for Black Sabbath .
He rejoined a reformed Deep Purple in 1984 , but was fired in 1989 .
He rejoined the band for a second time in 1992 for their twenty-fifth anniversary , and following the recruitment of guitarist Steve Morse in 1994 , has helped transform the group into a regular touring outfit , which he has fronted ever since .
In addition to his main work -- performing with Deep Purple and other bands during the 1970s and 1980s -- he sang the role of Jesus in the original recording of Andrew Lloyd Webber 's rock opera Jesus Christ Superstar , performed in the charity supergroup Rock Aid Armenia , and engaged in a number of business investments and ventures , including a hotel , a motorcycle manufacturer , and music recording facilities at Kingsway Studios .
More recently , he has performed solo concerts concurrently with his latter career in Deep Purple , and his work and affinity with Armenia , combined with his continued friendship with Tony Iommi since his brief time in Black Sabbath , has led him to form the supergroup WhoCares with Iommi .
His solo career outside of Deep Purple was given a comprehensive overview with the Gillan 's Inn box set in 2006 .