The Indian Army is the land-based branch and the largest component of the Indian Armed Forces .
The President of India serves as the Supreme Commander of the Indian Army , and it is commanded by the Chief of Army Staff -LRB- COAS -RRB- , who is a four-star general .
Two officers have been conferred with the rank of field marshal , a five-star rank , which is a ceremonial position of great honour .
The Indian Army originated from the armies of the East India Company , which eventually became the British Indian Army , and the armies of the princely states , which finally became the national army after independence .
The units and regiments of the Indian Army have diverse histories and have participated in a number of battles and campaigns across the world , earning a large number of battle and theatre honours before and after Independence .
The primary mission of the Indian Army is to ensure national security and nationhood unity , defending the nation from external aggression and internal threats , and maintaining peace and security within its borders .
It conducts humanitarian rescue operations during natural calamities and other disturbances , like Operation Surya Hope , and can also be requisitioned by the government to cope with internal threats .
It is a major component of national power alongside the Indian Navy and the Indian Air Force .
The army has been involved in four wars with neighbouring Pakistan and one with China .
Other major operations undertaken by the army include Operation Vijay , Operation Meghdoot and Operation Cactus .
Apart from conflicts , the army has conducted large peace time exercises like Operation Brasstacks and Exercise Shoorveer , and it has also been an active participant in numerous United Nations peacekeeping missions including the ones in Cyprus , Lebanon , Congo , Angola , Cambodia , Vietnam , Namibia , El Salvador , Liberia , Mozambique and Somalia .
The Indian Army has a regimental system , but is operationally and geographically divided into seven commands , with the basic field formation being a division .
It is an all-volunteer force and comprises more than 80 % of the country 's active defence personnel .
It is the 2nd largest standing army in the world , with 1,200,255 active troops and 990,960 reserve troops .
The army has embarked on an infantry modernisation program known as Futuristic Infantry Soldier As a System -LRB- F-INSAS -RRB- , and is also upgrading and acquiring new assets for its armoured , artillery and aviation branches .