The Indian National Congress -LRB- INC , often called Congress -RRB- is a broad-based political party in India .
Founded in 1885 , the Congress led India to independence from Great Britain , and powerfully influenced other anti-colonial nationalist movements in the British Empire .
After India 's independence in 1947 , the Congress formed the government at center in most instances , and also many regional state governments .
The Congress is a secular , left-of-centre , party .
Although it did not fare well in the last general elections in India in 2014 , it remains one of two major , nationwide , political parties in India , along with the right-wing , Hindu nationalist , Bhartiya Janata Party -LRB- BJP -RRB- .
The Congress was the first modern nationalist movement to emerge in the British Empire in Asia and Africa .
It was founded in Bombay in late December 1885 , during the British Raj in India .
Its principal founders were , Allan Octavian Hume -LRB- a former administrator of Etawah district , North-Western Provinces , and pioneering ornithologist of India -RRB- , as well as William Wedderburn , Pherozeshah Mehta , Dadabhai Naoroji , Dinshaw Wacha , and others .
From the late 19th-century , and especially after 1920 , under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi , Congress became the principal leader of the Indian independence movement , with over 15 million members and over 70 million participants .
After independence in 1947 , Congress became India 's dominant political party ; , in the 15 general elections since independence , it has won an outright majority on six occasions and has led the ruling coalition a further four times , heading the central government for 49 years .
There have been seven Congress Prime Ministers , the first being Jawaharlal Nehru -LRB- 1947 -- 64 -RRB- , and the most recent Manmohan Singh -LRB- 2004 -- 14 -RRB- .
The party 's social liberal platform is generally considered to be on the centre-left of Indian politics .
From 2004 to 2014 , the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance , a coalition of several regional parties , formed the Indian government and was headed by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh .
As of March 2017 , the party is in power in five states : Punjab , Himachal Pradesh , Karnataka , Meghalaya and Mizoram .
In Bihar , it is a part of the ruling coalition .
The Congress has previously directly ruled Andhra Pradesh , Tamil Nadu , Gujarat , Madhya Pradesh , Rajasthan , Uttar Pradesh and Goa .
In the 2014 general election , the Congress had its poorest post-independence general election performance , winning only 44 seats of the 543-member house .
The Congress ' social policy is based upon the Gandhian principle of Sarvodaya -- the lifting up of all sections of society -- which involves the improvement of the lives of economically underprivileged and socially marginalised people .
The party primarily endorses social liberalism -- seeking to balance individual liberty and social justice , and secularism -- asserting the right to be free from religious rule and teachings .