Henry Walton `` Indiana '' Jones Jr. -LRB- also shortened to Indy -RRB- is a fictional character and the protagonist of the Indiana Jones franchise .
George Lucas created the character in homage to the action heroes of 1930s film serials .
The character first appeared in the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark , to be followed by Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom in 1984 , Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade in 1989 , The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles from 1992 to 1996 , and Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull in 2008 .
The character is also featured in novels , comics , video games , and other media .
Jones is also featured in the Disney theme park attraction , Indiana Jones Adventure at Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea , as well as the Disneyland Paris attraction Indiana Jones et le Temple du Péril .
Jones is most famously played by Harrison Ford and has also been portrayed by River Phoenix -LRB- as the young Jones in The Last Crusade -RRB- and in the television series The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles by Corey Carrier , Sean Patrick Flanery , and George Hall .
Doug Lee has supplied the voice of Jones for two LucasArts video games , Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis and Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine , David Esch supplied his voice for Indiana Jones and the Emperor 's Tomb , and John Armstrong for Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings .
The character is distinguished by his appearance -LRB- bullwhip , fedora , satchel and leather jacket -RRB- , sense of humor , deep knowledge of many ancient civilizations and languages , and fear of snakes .
Since his first appearance in Raiders of the Lost Ark , Indiana Jones has become one of cinema 's most famous characters .
In 2003 , the American Film Institute ranked him the second greatest film hero of all time .
He was also named the 6th Greatest Movie Character by Empire magazine .
Entertainment Weekly ranked Indy 2nd on their list of The All-Time Coolest Heroes in Pop Culture .
Premiere magazine also placed Indy at number 7 on their list of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time .