Instant film is a type of photographic film introduced by Polaroid to be used in an instant camera -LRB- and , with accessory hardware , many other professional film cameras -RRB- .
The film contains the chemicals needed for developing and fixing the photograph , and the instant camera exposes and initiates the developing process after a photo has been taken .
In earlier Polaroid instant cameras the film is pulled through rollers which breaks open a pod containing a reagent that is spread between the exposed negative and receiving positive sheet .
This film sandwich develops for some time after which the positive sheet is peeled away from the negative to reveal the developed photo .
In 1972 , Polaroid introduced integral film , which incorporated timing and receiving layers to automatically develop and fix the photo without any intervention from the photographer .
Instant film is available in sizes from 24 x -LRB- similar to 135 film -RRB- up to 50.8 x size , with the most popular film sizes for consumer snapshots being approximately 83 x -LRB- the image itself is smaller as it is surrounded by a border -RRB- .
Early instant film was distributed on rolls , but later and current films are supplied in packs of 8 or 10 sheets , and single sheet films for use in large format cameras with a compatible back .
Though the quality of integral instant film is not as good as conventional film , peel apart black and white film , and to a lesser extent color film approached the quality of traditional film types .
Instant film was used where it was undesirable to have to wait for a roll of conventional film to be finished and processed , e.g. , documenting evidence in law enforcement , in health care and scientific applications , and producing photographs for passports and other identity documents , or simply for snapshots to be seen immediately .
Some photographers use instant film for test shots , to see how a subject or setup looks before using conventional film for the final exposure .
Instant film is also used by artists to achieve effects that are impossible to accomplish with traditional photography , by manipulating the emulsion during the developing process , or separating the image emulsion from the film base .
Instant film has been supplanted for most purposes by digital photography , which allows the result to be viewed immediately on a display screen or printed with dye sublimation , inkjet , or laser home or professional printers .
Instant film is notable for having had a wider range of film speeds available than other negative films of the same era , having been produced in ISO 4 to ISO 20,000 .
Current instant film formats typically have an ISO between 100 and 1000 .
Two companies manufacture instant film : Fujifilm -LRB- Instax integral film -RRB- and The Impossible Project for older Polaroid cameras -LRB- 600 , SX-70 , Spectra and 8x10 -RRB- .