Use mdy dates | date = May 2016 -RCB-
Interstellar is a 2014 British-American epic science fiction film directed , co-written , and co-produced by Christopher Nolan .
The film stars Matthew McConaughey , Anne Hathaway , Jessica Chastain , Bill Irwin , Casey Affleck , Ellen Burstyn , John Lithgow , and Michael Caine .
Set in a dystopian future where humanity is struggling to survive , it follows a group of astronauts who travel through a wormhole in search of a new home for humanity .
Brothers Christopher and Jonathan Nolan wrote the screenplay , which has its origins in a script Jonathan developed in 2007 .
Nolan produced the film with his wife Emma Thomas through their production company Syncopy and with Lynda Obst through Lynda Obst Productions .
Caltech theoretical physicist Kip Thorne , whose work inspired the film , was an executive producer and acted as scientific consultant .
Later , he also wrote a tie-in book , The Science of Interstellar .
Paramount Pictures , Warner Bros. , and Legendary Pictures co-financed the film .
Cinematographer Hoyte van Hoytema shot the film on 35 mm in anamorphic format and IMAX 70 mm .
Principal photography commenced in late 2013 in Alberta , Iceland and Los Angeles .
The film utilized extensive practical and miniature effects , while the company Double Negative created additional digital effects .
Interstellar premiered on October 26 , 2014 in Los Angeles .
In the United States , it was first released on film stock , expanding to venues using digital projectors .
The film was successful at the box office , with a worldwide gross of over $ 675 million , and received positive reviews , particularly in regards to its science fiction themes , visual effects , musical score , and the cast 's performances .
It received several awards and nominations ; at the 87th Academy Awards , the film won the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects , and was nominated for Best Original Score , Best Sound Mixing , Best Sound Editing , and Best Production Design .