The International Space Station -LRB- ISS -RRB- is a space station , or a habitable artificial satellite , in low Earth orbit .
Its first component launched into orbit in 1998 , and the ISS is now the largest man-made body in low Earth orbit and can often be seen with the naked eye from Earth .
The ISS consists of pressurised modules , external trusses , solar arrays , and other components .
ISS components have been launched by Russian Proton and Soyuz rockets , and American Space Shuttles .
The ISS serves as a microgravity and space environment research laboratory in which crew members conduct experiments in biology , human biology , physics , astronomy , meteorology , and other fields .
The station is suited for the testing of spacecraft systems and equipment required for missions to the Moon and Mars .
The ISS maintains an orbit with an altitude of between 330 and by means of reboost manoeuvres using the engines of the Zvezda module or visiting spacecraft .
It completes orbits per day .
The ISS is the ninth space station to be inhabited by crews , following the Soviet and later Russian Salyut , Almaz , and Mir stations as well as Skylab from the US .
The station has been continuously occupied for since the arrival of Expedition 1 on 2 November 2000 .
This is the longest continuous human presence in low Earth orbit , having surpassed the previous record of held by Mir .
The station is serviced by a variety of visiting spacecraft : the Russian Soyuz and Progress , the American Dragon and Cygnus , the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle , and formerly the Space Shuttle and the European Automated Transfer Vehicle .
It has been visited by astronauts , cosmonauts and space tourists from 17 different nations .
After the US Space Shuttle programme ended in 2011 , Soyuz rockets became the only provider of transport for astronauts at the International Space Station , and Dragon became the only provider of bulk cargo return to Earth -LRB- called downmass -RRB- .
Soyuz has very limited downmass capability .
The ISS programme is a joint project among five participating space agencies : NASA , Roscosmos , JAXA , ESA , and CSA .
The ownership and use of the space station is established by intergovernmental treaties and agreements .
The station is divided into two sections , the Russian Orbital Segment -LRB- ROS -RRB- and the United States Orbital Segment -LRB- USOS -RRB- , which is shared by many nations .
, the American portion of ISS is being funded until 2024 .
Roscosmos has endorsed the continued operation of ISS through 2024 but has proposed using elements of the Russian Orbital Segment to construct a new Russian space station called OPSEK .
On 28 March 2015 , Russian sources announced that Roscosmos and NASA had agreed to collaborate on the development of a replacement for the current ISS .
NASA later issued a guarded statement expressing thanks for Russia 's interest in future co-operation in space exploration but fell short of confirming the Russian announcement .