The iPhone 4 is a smartphone that was designed and marketed by Apple Inc. .
Following a number of notable leaks , the iPhone 4 was first unveiled on June 7 , 2010 , at Apple 's Worldwide Developers Conference in San Francisco , and was released on June 24 , 2010 , in the United States , United Kingdom , France , Germany and Japan .
It is the 4th generation of iPhone , succeeding the 3GS and preceding the 4S .
The iPhone 4 introduced a new hardware design to the iPhone family , which Apple 's CEO Steve Jobs touted as the thinnest smartphone in the world at the time ; it consisted of an uninsulated stainless steel frame which doubles as an antenna , with internal components situated between chemically strengthened aluminosilicate glass .
The iPhone 4 also introduced Apple 's new high-resolution `` Retina Display '' ; while maintaining the same physical size and aspect ratio as its precursors , its liquid crystal display had a pixel density of 326 pixels per inch .
The iPhone 4 also introduced Apple 's A4 system-on-chip , along with iOS 4 -- which notably introduced multitasking functionality and Apple 's new FaceTime video chat service .
The iPhone 4 was also the first iPhone to include a front-facing camera , and the first to be released in a version for CDMA networks , ending AT&T 's period as the exclusive carrier of iPhone products in the United States .
It was succeeded as Apple 's flagship smartphone in 2011 by the iPhone 4S .
However , iPhone 4 continued to be produced until 2013 .
The iPhone 4 received generally positive reception , with critics praising its revamped design and more powerful hardware in comparison to previous models .
While it was a market success , with over 600,000 pre-orders within 24 hours , the release of the iPhone 4 was plagued by highly publicized reports that abnormalities in its new antenna design caused the device to lose its cellular signal if held in a certain way .
Most human contact with the phone 's outer edge would cause a significant decrease in signal strength .
The iPhone 4 spent the longest time as Apple 's flagship iPhone model at fifteen months , and had the longest lifespan of any iPhone ever produced , spanning close to four years and available in some developing countries until early 2015 .