Ireland -LRB- -LSB- ˈaɪərlənd -RSB- Éire -LSB- ˈeːɾʲə -RSB- ; Ulster-Scots : Airlann -LSB- - scoˈɑːrlən -RSB- -RRB- is an island in the North Atlantic .
It is separated from Great Britain to its east by the North Channel , the Irish Sea , and St George 's Channel .
Ireland is the second-largest island of the British Isles , the third-largest in Europe , and the twentieth-largest on Earth .
Politically , Ireland is divided between the Republic of Ireland -LRB- officially named Ireland -RRB- , which covers five-sixths of the island , and Northern Ireland , which is part of the United Kingdom , in the northeast of the island .
In 2011 , the population of Ireland was about 6.4 million , ranking it the second-most populous island in Europe after Great Britain .
Just under 4.6 million live in the Republic of Ireland and just over 1.8 million live in Northern Ireland .
The island 's geography comprises relatively low-lying mountains surrounding a central plain , with several navigable rivers extending inland .
The island has lush vegetation , a product of its mild but changeable climate which avoids extremes in temperature .
Thick woodlands covered the island until the Middle Ages .
As of 2013 , the amount of land that is wooded in Ireland is about 11 % of the total , compared with a European average of 35 % .
There are twenty-six extant mammal species native to Ireland .
The Irish climate is very moderate and classified as oceanic .
As a result , winters are milder than expected for such a northerly area .
However , summers are cooler than those in Continental Europe .
Rainfall and cloud cover are abundant .
The earliest evidence of human presence in Ireland is dated at 10,500 BC .
Gaelic Ireland had emerged by the 1st century CE .
The island was Christianised from the 5th century onward .
Following the Norman invasion in the 12th century , England claimed sovereignty over Ireland .
However , English rule did not extend over the whole island until the 16th -- 17th century Tudor conquest , which led to colonisation by settlers from Britain .
In the 1690s , a system of Protestant English rule was designed to materially disadvantage the Catholic majority and Protestant dissenters , and was extended during the 18th century .
With the Acts of Union in 1801 , Ireland became a part of the United Kingdom .
A war of independence in the early 20th century was followed by the partition of the island , creating the Irish Free State , which became increasingly sovereign over the following decades , and Northern Ireland , which remained a part of the United Kingdom .
Northern Ireland saw much civil unrest from the late 1960s until the 1990s .
This subsided following a political agreement in 1998 .
In 1973 the Republic of Ireland joined the European Economic Community while the United Kingdom , and Northern Ireland , as part of it , did the same .
Irish culture has had a significant influence on other cultures , especially in the fields of literature .
Alongside mainstream Western culture , a strong indigenous culture exists , as expressed through Gaelic games , Irish music , and the Irish language .
The culture of the island also shares many features with that of Great Britain , including the English language , and sports such as association football , rugby , horse racing , and golf .