Iron Man is a 2008 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Paramount Pictures .
It is the first film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe .
The film was directed by Jon Favreau , with a screenplay by Mark Fergus & Hawk Ostby and Art Marcum & Matt Holloway .
It stars Robert Downey Jr. , Terrence Howard , Jeff Bridges , Shaun Toub and Gwyneth Paltrow .
In Iron Man , Tony Stark , an industrialist and master engineer , builds a powered exoskeleton and becomes the technologically advanced superhero Iron Man .
The film had been in development since 1990 at Universal Pictures , 20th Century Fox , or New Line Cinema at various times , before Marvel Studios reacquired the rights in 2006 .
Marvel put the project in production as its first self-financed film , with Paramount Pictures as its distributor .
Favreau signed on as director , aiming for a naturalistic feel , and he chose to shoot the film primarily in California , rejecting the East Coast setting of the comics to differentiate the film from numerous superhero films set in New York City-esque environments .
Filming began in March 2007 and concluded in June .
During filming , the actors were free to create their own dialogue because pre-production was focused on the story and action .
Rubber and metal versions of the armors , created by Stan Winston 's company , were mixed with computer-generated imagery to create the title character .
Iron Man premiered in Sydney on April 14 , 2008 , and was released in theaters on May 2 , 2008 .
The film was a critical and commercial success , grossing over $ 585 million and garnering widespread critical acclaim .
Downey 's performance as Tony Stark was particularly praised .
The American Film Institute selected the film as one of the ten best of the year .
It was also nominated for two Academy Awards for the Best Sound Editing and the Best Visual Effects .
Two sequels , Iron Man 2 and Iron Man 3 , were released on May 7 , 2010 , and May 3 , 2013 , respectively .