James VI and I -LRB- 19 June 1566 -- 27 March 1625 -RRB- was King of Scotland as James VI from 24 July 1567 and King of England and Ireland as James I from the union of the Scottish and English crowns on 24 March 1603 until his death .
The kingdoms of Scotland and England were individual sovereign states , with their own parliaments , judiciary , and laws , though both were ruled by James in personal union .
James was the son of Mary , Queen of Scots , and a great-great-grandson of Henry VII , King of England and Lord of Ireland , positioning him to eventually accede to all three thrones .
James succeeded to the Scottish throne at the age of thirteen months , after his mother Mary was compelled to abdicate in his favour .
Four different regents governed during his minority , which ended officially in 1578 , though he did not gain full control of his government until 1583 .
In 1603 , he succeeded the last Tudor monarch of England and Ireland , Elizabeth I , who died without issue .
He continued to reign in all three kingdoms for 22 years , a period known after him as the Jacobean era , until his death in 1625 at the age of 58 .
After the Union of the Crowns , he based himself in England -LRB- the largest of the three realms -RRB- from 1603 , only returning to Scotland once in 1617 , and styled himself `` King of Great Britain and Ireland '' .
He was a major advocate of a single parliament for England and Scotland .
In his reign , the Plantation of Ulster and British colonization of the Americas began .
At 57 years and 246 days , James 's reign in Scotland was longer than those of any of his predecessors .
He achieved most of his aims in Scotland but faced great difficulties in England , including the Gunpowder Plot in 1605 and repeated conflicts with the English Parliament .
Under James , the `` Golden Age '' of Elizabethan literature and drama continued , with writers such as William Shakespeare , John Donne , Ben Jonson , and Sir Francis Bacon contributing to a flourishing literary culture .
James himself was a talented scholar , the author of works such as Daemonologie -LRB- 1597 -RRB- , The True Law of Free Monarchies -LRB- 1598 -RRB- , and Basilikon Doron -LRB- 1599 -RRB- .
He sponsored the translation of the Bible that would later be named after him : the Authorised King James Version .
Sir Anthony Weldon claimed that James had been termed `` the wisest fool in Christendom '' , an epithet associated with his character ever since .
Since the latter half of the 20th century , historians have tended to revise James 's reputation and treat him as a serious and thoughtful monarch .