James Bryant Conant -LRB- March 26 , 1893 -- February 11 , 1978 -RRB- was an American chemist , a transformative President of Harvard University , and the first U.S. Ambassador to West Germany .
Conant obtained a PhD in Chemistry from Harvard in 1916 .
During World War I he served in the U.S. Army , working on the development of poison gases .
He became an assistant professor of chemistry at Harvard in 1919 , and the Sheldon Emery Professor of Organic Chemistry in 1929 .
He researched the physical structures of natural products , particularly chlorophyll , and he was one of the first to explore the sometimes complex relationship between chemical equilibrium and the reaction rate of chemical processes .
He studied the biochemistry of oxyhemoglobin providing insight into the disease methemoglobinemia , helped to explain the structure of chlorophyll , and contributed important insights that underlie modern theories of acid-base chemistry .
In 1933 , Conant became the President of Harvard University with a reformist agenda that involved dispensing with a number of customs , including class rankings and the requirement for Latin classes .
He abolished athletic scholarships , and instituted an `` up or out '' policy , under which scholars who were not promoted were terminated .
His egalitarian vision of education required a diversified student body , and he promoted the adoption of the Scholastic Aptitude Test -LRB- SAT -RRB- and co-educational classes .
During his presidency , women were admitted to Harvard Medical School and Harvard Law School for the first time .
Conant was appointed to the National Defense Research Committee -LRB- NDRC -RRB- in 1940 , becoming its chairman in 1941 .
In this capacity , he oversaw vital wartime research projects , including the development of synthetic rubber , and the Manhattan Project , which developed the first atomic bombs .
On July 16 , 1945 , he was among the dignitaries present at the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range for the Trinity nuclear test , the first detonation of an atomic bomb , and was part of the Interim Committee that advised President Harry S. Truman to use atomic bombs on Japan .
After the war , he served on the Joint Research and Development Board -LRB- JRDC -RRB- that was established to coordinate burgeoning defense research , and on the influential General Advisory Committee -LRB- GAC -RRB- of the Atomic Energy Commission -LRB- AEC -RRB- .
While in this position , he would advise the president against starting a development program for the `` hydrogen bomb '' .
In his later years at Harvard , Conant taught undergraduate courses on the history and philosophy of science , and wrote books explaining the scientific method to laymen .
In 1953 he retired as President of Harvard and became the United States High Commissioner for Germany , overseeing the restoration of German sovereignty after World War II , and then was Ambassador to West Germany until 1957 .
On returning to the United States , he criticized the education system in works such as The American High School Today -LRB- 1959 -RRB- , Slums and Suburbs -LRB- 1961 -RRB- and The Education of American Teachers -LRB- 1963 -RRB- .
Between 1965 and 1969 , Conant , suffering from a heart condition , worked on his autobiography , My Several Lives -LRB- 1970 -RRB- .
He became increasingly infirm , suffered a series of strokes in 1977 , and died in a nursing home the following year .