Janet Damita Jo Jackson -LRB- born May 16 , 1966 -RRB- is an American singer , songwriter , dancer and actress .
Known for sonically innovative , socially conscious , and sexually provocative records , elaborate stage shows , and high-profile television and film roles , she has been a prominent figure in popular culture for over 30 years .
The youngest child of the Jackson family , she began her career with the variety television series The Jacksons in 1976 and went on to appear in other television shows throughout the 1970s and early 1980s , including Good Times and Fame .
After signing a recording contract with A&M Records in 1982 , she became a pop icon following the release of her third studio album Control -LRB- 1986 -RRB- .
Her collaborations with record producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis incorporated elements of rhythm and blues , funk , disco , rap , and industrial beats , which led to crossover success in popular music .
In 1991 Jackson signed the first of two record-breaking multimillion-dollar contracts with Virgin Records , establishing her as one of the highest paid artists in the industry .
Her debut album under the label , Janet -LRB- 1993 -RRB- , saw her develop a public image as a sex symbol as she began to explore sexuality in her work .
That same year , she appeared in her first starring film role in Poetic Justice ; she has continued to act in feature films .
By the end of the 1990s , she was the second most successful recording artist of the decade .
The release of her seventh studio album All for You -LRB- 2001 -RRB- coincided with a celebration of her impact on popular music as the inaugural MTV Icon .
After parting ways with Virgin she released her tenth studio album , Discipline -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , her first and only album with Island Records .
In 2015 she partnered with BMG Rights Management to launch her own record label , Rhythm Nation , and released her eleventh studio album Unbreakable the same year .
Having sold over 100 million records , Jackson is one of the best-selling artists in the history of contemporary music .
She has amassed an extensive catalog , with singles such as `` Nasty '' , `` Rhythm Nation '' , `` That 's the Way Love Goes '' , `` Together Again '' and `` All for You '' ; she holds the record for the most consecutive top 10 hits on the US Billboard Hot 100 singles chart by a female artist with 18 .
In 2016 , Billboard placed her number seven on its list of the Hot 100 All-Time Top Artists , and in 2010 ranked her fifth among the `` Top 50 R&B / Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years '' .
In December 2016 , the magazine named her the second most successful dance club artist of all-time .
One of the world 's most awarded artists , her longevity , records and achievements reflect her influence in shaping and redefining the scope of popular music .
She has been cited as an inspiration among numerous performers .