Jean Grey-Summers -LRB- born Jean Elaine Grey -RRB- is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics .
The character has been known under the aliases Marvel Girl , Phoenix , and Dark Phoenix .
Created by writer Stan Lee and artist Jack Kirby , the character first appeared in The X-Men # 1 -LRB- September 1963 -RRB- .
Jean Grey is a member of a subspecies of humans known as mutants , who are born with superhuman abilities .
She was born with telepathic and telekinetic powers .
Her powers first manifested when she saw her childhood friend being hit by a car .
She is a caring , nurturing figure , but she also has to deal with being an Omega-level mutant and the physical manifestation of the cosmic Phoenix Force .
Jean Grey experienced a transformation into the Phoenix in the X-Men storyline `` The Dark Phoenix Saga '' .
She has faced death numerous times in the history of the series .
Her first death was under her guise as Marvel Girl , when she died and was `` reborn '' as Phoenix in `` The Dark Phoenix Saga '' .
This transformation led to her second death , which was suicide , though not her last .
She is an important figure in the lives of other Marvel Universe characters , mostly the X-Men , including her husband Cyclops , her mentor and father figure Charles Xavier , her unrequited love interest Wolverine , her best friend and sister-like figure Storm , and her genetic children Rachel Summers , X-Man , Cable , and Stryfe .
The character was present for much of the X-Men 's history , and she was featured in all three X-Men animated series and several video games .
She is a playable character in X-Men Legends -LRB- 2004 -RRB- , X-Men Legends II : Rise of Apocalypse -LRB- 2005 -RRB- , Marvel Ultimate Alliance 2 -LRB- 2009 -RRB- , Marvel vs Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds -LRB- 2011 -RRB- , Marvel Heroes -LRB- 2013 -RRB- , and Lego Marvel Super Heroes -LRB- 2013 -RRB- , and appeared as a non-playable in the first Marvel : Ultimate Alliance .
Famke Janssen portrayed the character in five installments of the X-Men films .
Sophie Turner portrays a younger version in the 2016 film X-Men : Apocalypse .
In 2006 , IGN rated Jean Grey 6th on their list of top 25 X-Men from the past forty years , and in 2011 , IGN ranked her 13th in the `` Top 100 Comic Book Heroes '' .
Her Dark Phoenix persona was ranked 9th in IGN 's `` Top 100 Comic Book Villains of All Time '' list , the highest rank for a female character .