Jeffrey Nero Hardy -LRB- born August 31 , 1977 -RRB- is an American professional wrestler , singer-songwriter , painter and musician currently signed to WWE on the Raw brand , where he is one-half of the brand 's Tag Team Champions in his first reign .
Hardy is best known for his work during his first run in the World Wrestling Federation -LRB- WWF -RRB- , later renamed to World Wrestling Entertainment -LRB- WWE -RRB- , and he also worked for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling -LRB- TNA , now known as Impact Wrestling -RRB- .
Before gaining prominence in WWE , Hardy performed for the Organization of Modern Extreme Grappling Arts -LRB- OMEGA -RRB- , a promotion he ran with his brother Matt .
After being signed by WWE , the brothers worked as enhancement talents , before gaining notoriety in the tag team division , partly due to their participation in Tables , Ladders and Chairs matches .
With the addition of Lita , the team became known as Team Xtreme and continued to rise in popularity .
As a tag team wrestler , Hardy is an ten-time world tag team champion -LRB- six World Tag Team Championships , one WCW Tag Team Championship , two TNA World Tag Team Championships , and one ROH World Tag Team Championship -RRB- -- all with his brother Matt .
On the independent circuit , Jeff was also one-half of the OMEGA Tag Team Champions with Matt in their second reign and one-half of the The Crash Tag Team Champions with Matt in their first reign .
As a singles wrestler , Hardy is a six-time world champion , having held the TNA World Heavyweight Championship three times , the WWE Championship once , and WWE 's World Heavyweight Championship twice .
Within WWE , he also held the Intercontinental Championship four times , the Light Heavyweight , and European Championships once each and the Hardcore Championship three times , making him the eighteenth Triple Crown Champion and the ninth Grand Slam Champion in company history .
Between WWE , TNA , and ROH , Hardy has won 25 total championships .
Hardy is involved in motocross , music , painting , and other artistic endeavors .
He is currently a member of the band PeroxWhy?Gen , with whom he has released two studio albums and one extended play .
Hardy , along with his brother Matt , returned to the WWE at WrestleMania 33 after an 8-year absence , winning the Raw Tag Team Championship , thus becoming a seven-time WWE tag team champion with his brother Matt .