Jenna Jameson -LRB- born Jenna Marie Massoli ; April 9 , 1974 -RRB- is an American entrepreneur , webcam model and former pornographic film actress , who has been called the world 's most famous adult entertainment performer and `` The Queen of Porn '' .
She started acting in erotic videos in 1993 after having worked as a stripper and glamor model .
By 1996 , she had won the `` top newcomer '' award from each of the three major adult-movie organizations .
She has since won more than 35 adult-video awards , and has been inducted into the X-Rated Critics Organization -LRB- XRCO -RRB- and Adult Video News -LRB- AVN -RRB- Halls of Fame .
Jameson founded the adult-entertainment company ClubJenna in 2000 with Jay Grdina , whom she later married and divorced .
Initially a single website , this business expanded into managing similar websites of other stars and began producing sexually explicit videos in 2001 .
The first such movie , Briana Loves Jenna -LRB- with Briana Banks -RRB- , was named at the 2003 AVN Awards as the best-selling and best-renting pornographic title for 2002 .
By 2005 , ClubJenna had revenues of US$ 30 million with profits estimated at half that .
Advertisements for her site and films , often bearing her picture , have towered on a 48-foot-tall billboard in New York City 's Times Square .
Jameson has also crossed over into mainstream pop culture , starting with a minor role in Howard Stern 's 1997 film Private Parts .
Her mainstream appearances continued with several guest-hosting and guest-starring on various television programs .
Playboy TV hosted her Jenna 's American Sex Star reality show , in which aspiring porn stars competed for a ClubJenna contract .
Her 2004 autobiography , How to Make Love Like a Porn Star : A Cautionary Tale , spent six weeks on The New York Times Best Seller list .
Jameson announced her retirement from pornography at the 2008 AVN Awards , stating that she would never return to the industry .
Although she no longer performs in pornographic films , she has been working as a webcam model since 2013 .