Jennifer Kate Hudson -LRB- born September 12 , 1981 -RRB- is an American singer , actress and spokesperson .
She rose to fame in 2004 as a finalist on the third season of American Idol , coming in seventh place .
As an actress , she made her film debut portraying Effie White in Dreamgirls , for which she gained worldwide acclaim and won an Academy Award , a Golden Globe Award , a BAFTA Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Supporting Actress .
She has also appeared in such films as Sex and the City , The Secret Life of Bees and Black Nativity .
She has made numerous television appearances , including guest roles on Smash , Empire and Inside Amy Schumer .
In 2015 she made her Broadway debut in the role of Shug Avery in the 2015 revival of The Color Purple .
As a singer , Hudson has released three studio albums .
Her debut album Jennifer Hudson , released in 2008 , debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA , with sales exceeding a million copies worldwide .
The record was nominated for four Grammy Awards , winning the 2009 Grammy Award for Best R&B Album .
Her second album I Remember Me , released in 2011 , also debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA .
Her third and most recent album JHUD peaked in the top ten and featured the Grammy-nominated track `` It 's Your World '' .
She also became the principal singer of The Color Purple musical album , which earned her the 2017 Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album and a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Musical Performance in a Daytime Program -LRB- shared with the cast of The Color Purple -RRB- .
In October 2008 , after Hudson 's mother , brother and nephew were killed in a shooting , Hudson stepped out of the public eye for three months .
Hudson resumed her public appearances in 2009 , with high-profile performances at Super Bowl XLIII , the Grammy Awards , American Idol , and The Oprah Winfrey Show .
Hudson has been described as a friend of former President Barack Obama , who invited her to appear with him at a fundraiser in Beverly Hills during his first term in May 2009 .
She also performed at the White House at the `` Celebration of Music from the Civil Rights Movement '' event .
In 2013 , she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame .
In 2016 , Hudson was announced as a coach on the 2017 Series of The Voice UK .
The following year , Hudson was announced as a coach on the thirteenth season of The Voice .