Jennifer Lynn Lopez -LRB- born July 24 , 1969 -RRB- , also known as JLo , is an American singer , actress , dancer , fashion designer , author , and producer .
Lopez gained her first high-profile job as a Fly Girl dancer on In Living Color in 1991 , where she remained a regular until she decided to pursue an acting career in 1993 .
She received her first leading role in the Selena biopic of the same name in 1997 , a portrayal that earned her a Golden Globe nomination .
For her role in Out of Sight the following year , Lopez became the first Latina actress to earn over for a film .
She ventured into the music industry in 1999 with her debut studio album On the 6 , preceded by the number-one single `` If You Had My Love '' .
With the simultaneous release of her second studio album J.Lo and her film The Wedding Planner in 2001 , Lopez became the first woman to have a number one album and film in the same week .
Her 2002 remix album , J to tha L -- O !
The Remixes , became the first in history to debut at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 .
Following her second divorce , Lopez had a high-profile relationship with Ben Affleck , which strongly influenced her third studio album , This Is Me ... Then -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , while also overshadowing the release of Gigli -LRB- 2003 -RRB- , a critical and commercial failure .
She subsequently married longtime friend Marc Anthony , and rebounded with the box office successes Shall We Dance ?
-LRB- 2004 -RRB- and Monster-in-Law -LRB- 2005 -RRB- .
Her fifth studio album , Como Ama una Mujer -LRB- 2007 -RRB- , received the highest first-week sales for a debut Spanish album in the United States .
Lopez gave birth to twins in 2008 , and after a relatively unsuccessful period , returned to prominence in 2011 with her appearance as a judge on American Idol and most commercially successful single to date , `` On the Floor '' , which is one of the best-selling singles of all time .
In 2016 , she began starring as Harlee Santos in the crime drama series Shades of Blue .
With a cumulative film gross of over and global record sales exceeding 80 million , she is regarded as the most influential Hispanic performer in the United States , as well as its highest paid Latin entertainer .
Time listed her as one of the 25 most influential Hispanic Americans , and in 2012 , Forbes ranked her as the most powerful celebrity in the world , as well as the 38th most powerful woman in the world .
For her contributions to the arts , Lopez has received a landmark star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame and the Billboard Icon Award , among other honors .
Beyond entertainment , she enjoys a successful business career consisting of various clothing lines , accessories , fragrances , a production company , and a charitable foundation , among other ventures .