Johann Wolfgang von Goethe -LRB- -LSB- ˈgɜːrtə -RSB- -LSB- ˈjoːhan ˈvɔlfɡaŋ fɔn ˈɡøːtə -RSB- ; 28 August 1749 -- 22 March 1832 -RRB- was a German writer and statesman .
His works include epic and lyric poetry ; prose and verse dramas ; memoirs ; an autobiography ; literary and aesthetic criticism ; treatises on botany , anatomy , and colour ; and four novels .
In addition , numerous literary and scientific fragments , more than 10,000 letters , and nearly 3,000 drawings by him exist .
A literary celebrity by the age of 25 , Goethe was ennobled by the Duke of Saxe-Weimar , Carl August in 1782 after taking up residence there in November 1775 following the success of his first novel , The Sorrows of Young Werther .
He was an early participant in the Sturm und Drang literary movement .
During his first ten years in Weimar , Goethe was a member of the Duke 's privy council , sat on the war and highway commissions , oversaw the reopening of silver mines in nearby Ilmenau , and implemented a series of administrative reforms at the University of Jena .
He also contributed to the planning of Weimar 's botanical park and the rebuilding of its Ducal Palace , which in 1998 were together designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site .
His first major scientific work , the Metamorphosis of Plants , was published after he returned from a 1788 tour of Italy .
In 1791 , he was made managing director of the theatre at Weimar , and in 1794 he began a friendship with the dramatist , historian , and philosopher Friedrich Schiller , whose plays he premiered until Schiller 's death in 1805 .
During this period , Goethe published his second novel , Wilhelm Meister 's Apprenticeship , the verse epic Hermann and Dorothea , and , in 1808 , the first part of his most celebrated drama , Faust .
His conversations and various common undertakings throughout the 1790s with Schiller , Johann Gottlieb Fichte , Johann Gottfried Herder , Alexander von Humboldt , Wilhelm von Humboldt , and August and Friedrich Schlegel have , in later years , been collectively termed Weimar Classicism .
Arthur Schopenhauer cited Wilhelm Meister 's Apprenticeship as one of the four greatest novels ever written , along with Tristram Shandy , La Nouvelle Héloïse , and Don Quixote , and Ralph Waldo Emerson selected Goethe as one of six `` representative men '' in his work of the same name , along with Plato , Emanuel Swedenborg , Michel de Montaigne , Napoleon , and William Shakespeare .
Goethe 's comments and observations form the basis of several biographical works , most notably Johann Peter Eckermann 's Conversations with Goethe .