John Clayton Mayer -LRB- -LSB- ˈmeɪ.ɚ -RSB- born October 16 , 1977 -RRB- is an American singer-songwriter , guitarist , and producer .
He was born in Bridgeport , Connecticut , and raised in nearby Fairfield .
He attended Berklee College of Music in Boston , but disenrolled and moved to Atlanta in 1997 with Clay Cook .
Together , they formed a short-lived two-man band called Lo-Fi Masters .
After their split , Mayer continued to play local clubs -- refining his skills and gaining a following .
After his appearance at the 2001 South by Southwest Festival , he was signed to Aware Records , and then Columbia Records , which released his first EP , Inside Wants Out .
His following two full-length albums -- Room for Squares -LRB- 2001 -RRB- and Heavier Things -LRB- 2003 -RRB- -- did well commercially , achieving multi-platinum status .
In 2003 , he won the Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance for the single `` Your Body Is a Wonderland '' .
Though Mayer started his career mainly performing acoustic rock , he began moving towards the blues genre that had originally influenced him as a musician .
By 2005 , he was collaborating with blues artists such as B. B. King , Buddy Guy , and Eric Clapton .
Forming the John Mayer Trio , he released a live album in 2005 called Try !
, and his third studio album Continuum in 2006 .
Both albums received wide critical acclaim , and Continuum earned Mayer a 2007 Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album .
He also won Best Male Pop Vocal Performance for `` Waiting on the World to Change '' .
That album was followed by Battle Studies in 2009 , a return to pop , with a number-one grossing tour .
After having several controversial incidents with the media , Mayer withdrew from public life in 2010 and began work on a follow-up album , called Born and Raised , that would draw inspiration from the 1970s pop music of Laurel Canyon .
However , the discovery of a granuloma on his vocal cords delayed the release of the album until May 2012 , and ultimately forced him to cancel the planned tour .
Even so , the album enjoyed a generally favorable reception , though was less commercially successful than his previous work .
After extensive treatments for his vocal problems -- and a two-year hiatus -- Mayer began performing as a singer again in January 2013 , and that year released the album , Paradise Valley .
The album is named for where he lives in Montana and features country music influences .
By 2014 , he had sold a total of over 20 million albums worldwide .
After developing an interest in the Grateful Dead and connecting with Bob Weir , Mayer formed Dead & Company with three former Grateful Dead musicians .
After two well-received tours in the fall of 2015 and summer of 2016 , the band has already committed to another tour for the summer of 2017 .
Mayer 's secondary career pursuits extend to television hosting , comedy , and writing ; he has authored columns for magazines such as Esquire .
He supports various causes and has performed at charity benefits .
He is a watch aficionado -LRB- with a collection he values in the `` tens of millions '' of dollars -RRB- , and has been on the jury at the Grand Prix d'Horlogerie de Genève .
He currently lives in Montana .
His latest song is `` Love on the Weekend '' .