John Deighton -LRB- November 1830 -- May 23 , 1875 -RRB- , generally known as `` Gassy Jack '' , was a Canadian bar owner who was born in Hull , England .
The Gastown neighbourhood of Vancouver , British Columbia is named after him .
Growing up in Hull , a major seaport , Deighton and his brothers Tom and Richard learned to sail .
Tom and Richard apprenticed on British ships , but Jack did not receive that opportunity .
However , this meant he could switch to sailing on U.S. ships .
When the California Gold Rush hit , ships were in demand to transport cargo and people from New York to San Francisco .
In 1850 , this voyage around Cape Horn took 140 -- 160 days .
Deighton signed up to work a new clipper Invincible that could sail 400 miles a day and made the trip in only 115 days .
The next journey was to Hong Kong .
Deighton was 21 years old and Third Officer .
Next , Deighton visited family at home in England and then returned to the U.S. , never returning to England again .
Next , Deighton worked a gold claim in California , along with many others , until February 1858 when there was news of gold further north in a British territory known as New Caledonia .
The Fraser Canyon Gold Rush had begun and Deighton sailed north along with thousands of others .
The harsh winter took its toll on the prospectors but Deighton stayed for 5 years .
He found no gold , though others did .
New Caledonia was now the Colony of British Columbia .
Traffic on the Fraser River was increasing as more miners arrived , but so far only American steamers were able to travel beyond Langley .
Local boats were built to meet this need and Deighton piloted steamships and sternwheelers on the Fraser River for several years .
By 1864 , Deighton was forced to pursue other lines of work as he developed health problems -LRB- swelling of the legs and feet -RRB- .
Between 1862 and 1867 , he ran a bar called the Globe Saloon in New Westminster , British Columbia .
It was quite prosperous due to the Cariboo Gold Rush .
But in 1867 when Deighton went out of town to visit the hot mineral springs near Harrison Lake , he entrusted the bar to an old shipmate , an American .
On July 4 the celebrations got out of hand and Deighton returned to find his business ruined .
In 1867 , Deighton opened a bar on the south side of Burrard Inlet at the behest of his old friend , Captain Edward Stamp , the owner of the Hastings Mill .
He later named it the Globe Saloon in memory of his previous bar in New Westminster .
He came to the area with little more than $ 6 to his name , a few simple pieces of furniture , his native wife -LRB- whose name has been lost to the years -RRB- , and a yellow dog .
The bar was built by idle sawmill workers in exchange for all the whiskey they could drink in one sitting -LRB- the nearest drinking hole was 25 miles away -RRB- .
His patrons were mainly sailors and workers from the nearby sawmill .
When business dwindled there , Deighton tried to acquire 20 waterfront acres near Moody 's Mill and build a new saloon there .
The local natives protested and the Governor agreed - Deighton went back to his previous bar , the Globe Saloon .
This bar was demolished when the townsite of Granville was established .
Deighton bought a nearby lot for $ 135 at the south-west corner of Carrall and Water Streets , where he built Deighton House .
Deighton 's native wife died .
Before she died she arranged for Deighton to marry her 12-year-old niece Quahail-ya , also known as Madeline or Matrine .
In 1871 she gave birth to Richard Mason Deighton .
Jack 's brother Tom Deighton and his wife took over the business in 1873 and Jack returned to working the steamship that plied the Fraser River , this time as a Captain of the steamer Onward .
However , after a family quarrel a few months later , Jack resumed management of the saloon and operated it until he became ill and died at the age of 44 on May 23 , 1875 .
He is interred at the Fraser Cemetery in New Westminster , British Columbia .
The location of the monument is -LRB- WGS84 -RRB- .
Deighton was known as Gassy Jack because of his talkative nature and his penchant for storytelling .
The name stuck and the area around his bar is now known as Gastown .
He was succeeded by his son with Quahail-ya , Richard , who was derisively nicknamed the `` Earl of Granville '' .
Richard died before Jack 's meager estate -LRB- about $ 300 -RRB- was probated .
Quahail-ya returned to the North Shore and married `` Big William '' .
She outlived him too , and died August 10 , 1948 , aged 90 .
The Deighton House was later burned in the Great Vancouver Fire of June 1886 .
In honour of Jack Deighton , the Gassy Jack statue stands in Maple Tree Square , in Gastown .