The Joker is a fictional supervillain created by Bill Finger , Bob Kane , and Jerry Robinson who first appeared in the debut issue of the comic book Batman -LRB- April 25 , 1940 -RRB- published by DC Comics .
Credit for the Joker 's creation is disputed ; Kane and Robinson claimed responsibility for the Joker 's design , while acknowledging Finger 's writing contribution .
Although the Joker was planned to be killed off during his initial appearance , he was spared by editorial intervention , allowing the character to endure as the archenemy of the superhero Batman .
In his comic book appearances , the Joker is portrayed as a criminal mastermind .
Introduced as a psychopath with a warped , sadistic sense of humor , the character became a goofy prankster in the late 1950s in response to regulation by the Comics Code Authority , before returning to his darker roots during the early 1970s .
As Batman 's nemesis , the Joker has been part of the superhero 's defining stories , including the murder of Jason Todd -- the second Robin and Batman 's ward -- and the paralysis of one of Batman 's allies , Barbara Gordon .
The Joker has had various possible origin stories during his decades of appearances .
The most common story involves him falling into a tank of chemical waste which bleaches his skin white , turns his hair green , and his lips bright red ; the resulting disfigurement drives him insane .
The antithesis of Batman in personality and appearance , the Joker is considered by critics to be his perfect adversary .
The Joker possesses no superhuman abilities , instead using his expertise in chemical engineering to develop poisonous or lethal concoctions , and thematic weaponry , including razor-tipped playing cards , deadly joy buzzers , and acid-spraying lapel flowers .
The Joker sometimes works with other Gotham City supervillains such as the Penguin and Two-Face , and groups like the Injustice Gang and Injustice League , but these relationships often collapse due to the Joker 's desire for unbridled chaos .
The 1990s introduced a romantic interest for the Joker in his former psychiatrist , Harley Quinn , who becomes his villainous sidekick .
Although his primary obsession is Batman , the Joker has also fought other heroes including Superman and Wonder Woman .
One of the most iconic characters in popular culture , the Joker has been listed among the greatest comic book villains and fictional characters ever created .
The character 's popularity has seen him appear on a variety of merchandise , such as clothing and collectable items , inspire real-world structures -LRB- such as theme park attractions -RRB- , and be referenced in a number of media .
The Joker has been adapted to serve as Batman 's adversary in live-action , animated , and video game incarnations , including the 1960s Batman television series -LRB- played by Cesar Romero -RRB- and in film by Jack Nicholson in Batman -LRB- 1989 -RRB- , Heath Ledger in The Dark Knight -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , and Jared Leto in Suicide Squad -LRB- 2016 -RRB- .
Mark Hamill , Troy Baker , and others have provided the character 's voice .