Paul Joseph Goebbels -LRB- -LSB- ˈpʰaʊ̯l ˈjoːzəf ˈɡœbəls -RSB- ; 29 October 1897 -- 1 May 1945 -RRB- was a German politician and Reich Minister of Propaganda of Nazi Germany from 1933 to 1945 .
He was one of Adolf Hitler 's close associates and most devoted followers , and was known for his skills in public speaking and his deep , virulent antisemitism , which was evident in his publicly voiced views .
He advocated progressively harsher discrimination , including the extermination of the Jews in the Holocaust .
Goebbels , who aspired to be an author , obtained a Doctor of Philosophy degree from the University of Heidelberg in 1921 .
He joined the Nazi Party in 1924 , and worked with Gregor Strasser in their northern branch .
He was appointed as Gauleiter -LRB- district leader -RRB- for Berlin in 1926 , where he began to take an interest in the use of propaganda to promote the party and its programme .
After the Nazi Seizure of Power in 1933 , Goebbels ' Propaganda Ministry quickly gained and exerted controlling supervision over the news media , arts , and information in Germany .
He was particularly adept at using the relatively new media of radio and film for propaganda purposes .
Topics for party propaganda included antisemitism , attacks on the Christian churches , and -LRB- after the start of the Second World War -RRB- attempting to shape morale .
In 1943 , Goebbels began to pressure Hitler to introduce measures that would produce total war , including closing businesses not essential to the war effort , conscripting women into the labour force , and enlisting men in previously exempt occupations into the Wehrmacht .
Hitler finally appointed him as Reich Plenipotentiary for Total War on 23 July 1944 , whereby Goebbels undertook largely unsuccessful measures to increase the number of people available for armaments production and the Wehrmacht .
As the war drew to a close and Nazi Germany faced defeat , Magda Goebbels and the Goebbels children joined him in Berlin .
They moved into the underground Vorbunker , part of Hitler 's underground bunker complex , on 22 April 1945 .
Hitler committed suicide on 30 April .
In accordance with Hitler 's will , Goebbels succeeded him as Chancellor of Germany ; he served one day in this post .
The following day , Goebbels and his wife committed suicide , after poisoning their six children with cyanide .