Journey is an American rock band that formed in San Francisco in 1973 , composed of former members of Santana and Frumious Bandersnatch .
The band has gone through several phases ; its strongest commercial success occurred between 1978 and 1987 .
During that period , the band released a series of hit songs , including `` Do n't Stop Believin ' -LRB- 1981 -RRB- , which in 2009 became the top-selling track in iTunes history among songs not released in the 21st century .
Its parent studio album , Escape , the band 's eighth and most successful , reached No. 1 on the Billboard 200 and yielded another of their most popular singles , `` Open Arms '' .
Its 1983 follow-up album , Frontiers , was almost as successful in the United States , reaching No. 2 and spawning several successful singles ; it broadened the band 's appeal in the United Kingdom , where it reached No. 6 on the UK Albums Chart .
Journey enjoyed a successful reunion in the mid-1990s and later regrouped with a series of lead singers .
Sales have resulted in two Gold albums , eight multi-platinum albums , and two diamond albums -LRB- including seven consecutive multi-platinum albums between 1978 and 1987 -RRB- .
They have had eighteen Top 40 singles in the U.S. -LRB- the second most without a Billboard Hot 100 number one single behind Electric Light Orchestra with 20 -RRB- , six of which reached the Top 10 of the US chart and two of which reached No. 1 on other Billboard charts , and a No. 6 hit on the UK Singles Chart in `` Do n't Stop Believin .
In 2005 , `` Do n't Stop Believin reached No. 3 on iTunes downloads .
Originally a progressive rock band , Journey was described by AllMusic as having cemented a reputation as `` one of America 's most beloved -LRB- and sometimes hated -RRB- commercial rock/pop bands '' by 1978 , when they redefined their sound by embracing pop arrangements on their fourth album , Infinity .
According to the Recording Industry Association of America , Journey has sold 48 million albums in the U.S. , making them the 25th best-selling band .
Their worldwide sales have reached close to 90 million records , making them one of the world 's best-selling bands of all time .
A 2005 USA Today opinion poll named Journey the fifth-best American rock band in history .
Their songs have become arena rock staples and are still played on rock radio stations across the world .
Journey ranks No. 96 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Artists of All Time .
Journey was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame with the class of 2017 .
Inductees included lead singer Steve Perry , guitarist Neal Schon , keyboardists Jonathan Cain and Gregg Rolie , bassist Ross Valory , and drummers Aynsley Dunbar and Steve Smith .