Judy Garland -LRB- born Frances Ethel Gumm ; June 10 , 1922 -- June 22 , 1969 -RRB- was an American singer , actress , and vaudevillian .
She was renowned for her contralto vocals and attained international stardom that continued throughout a career spanning more than 40 years as an actress in musical and dramatic roles , as a recording artist , and on concert stages .
Garland began performing in vaudeville with her two older sisters and was signed to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer as a teenager .
She made more than two dozen films with MGM , including nine with Mickey Rooney .
Garland 's most famous role was as Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz -LRB- 1939 -RRB- .
Her other roles at MGM included Meet Me in St. Louis -LRB- 1944 -RRB- , The Harvey Girls -LRB- 1946 -RRB- and Easter Parade -LRB- 1948 -RRB- .
After 15 years , she was released from the studio and made record-breaking concert appearances , a successful recording career , and her own Emmy-nominated television series .
Film appearances became fewer in her later years , but included two Academy Award nominated performances in A Star Is Born -LRB- 1954 -RRB- and Judgment at Nuremberg -LRB- 1961 -RRB- .
Garland received a Golden Globe Award , a Juvenile Academy Award , and a Special Tony Award , and at 39 , became the youngest and first female recipient of the Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement in the film industry .
She was the first woman to win a Grammy for Album of the Year for her live recording of Judy at Carnegie Hall .
In 1997 , Garland was posthumously awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award .
Several of her recordings have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame .
In 1999 , the American Film Institute placed her among the 10 greatest female stars of classic American cinema .
From an early age , Garland struggled in her personal life .
The pressures of adolescent stardom sent her to a psychiatrist at age 18 .
Her self-image was influenced by film executives who said she was unattractive and manipulated her on-screen physical appearance .
She was plagued by financial instability , often owing hundreds of thousands of dollars in back taxes .
She married five times , with her first four marriages ending in divorce .
She also had a long addiction with drugs and alcohol , which ultimately led to her death from a barbiturate overdose at the age of 47 .