Jurassic World is a 2015 American science-fiction adventure film and the fourth installment of the Jurassic Park series .
The film was directed and co-written by Colin Trevorrow , produced by Frank Marshall and Patrick Crowley , and stars Chris Pratt and Bryce Dallas Howard .
The production companies were Steven Spielberg 's Amblin Entertainment , also responsible for the rest of the Jurassic Park franchise , and Thomas Tull 's Legendary Pictures .
Set 22 years after the events of Jurassic Park , Jurassic World takes place on the same fictional island of Isla Nublar , off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica , where a theme park populated with cloned dinosaurs has operated for ten years .
The park plunges into chaos when a genetically created dinosaur breaks loose and goes on a rampage across the island .
Universal Pictures intended to begin production on a fourth Jurassic Park film in 2004 for a summer 2005 release , but the film entered over a decade of development hell while the script went through revisions .
Following a suggestion from Spielberg , writers Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver explored the idea of a functional dinosaur park .
Once Trevorrow was hired as director in 2013 , he followed the same idea while developing a whole new script with Derek Connolly .
Principal photography rolled from April to August 2014 , primarily in Louisiana while also using the original Jurassic Park filming locations in Hawaii .
Again the dinosaurs were created through computer-generated imagery by Industrial Light & Magic and life-sized animatronics by Legacy Effects , a company created by the alumni of Jurassic Park veteran Stan Winston .
Jurassic World was completed on May 10 , 2015 , and was released in over 60 countries beginning on June 10 , 2015 .
After a record-breaking opening weekend during which it grossed $ 500 million worldwide , Jurassic World generated a total of $ 1.6 billion in box office revenue , standing as the fourth highest-grossing film of all time without inflation adjustment , as well as the second highest-grossing film of 2015 and the highest-grossing film in the franchise .
A sequel is scheduled for release on June 22 , 2018 .