Glenn Thomas Jacobs -LRB- born April 26 , 1967 -RRB- , better known by the ring name Kane , is an American professional wrestler , insurance broker , politician and actor .
He is signed to WWE on the SmackDown brand , where he is currently on a hiatus as he is running for the office of mayor of Knox County , Tennessee .
Jacobs began his professional wrestling career on the independent circuit in 1992 .
He wrestled in promotions such as Smoky Mountain Wrestling -LRB- SMW -RRB- and the United States Wrestling Association -LRB- USWA -RRB- before joining the World Wrestling Federation -LRB- now WWE -RRB- in 1995 .
Jacobs played various characters until 1997 , when he was repackaged as Kane , the demonic and/or monstrous younger half-brother of The Undertaker , with whom Jacobs would alternatively feud or team as The Brothers of Destruction .
Following his debut , Kane remained a pivotal component of the company 's Attitude Era of the late 1990s and early 2000s , defeating Stone Cold Steve Austin -- the `` poster boy '' of the era -- for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship in his first pay-per-view -LRB- PPV -RRB- main event at King of the Ring 1998 .
He has continued to compete in world championship PPV matches through the mid 2010s .
Kane has won 23 total championships during his WWF/E career , including being a three-time world champion -LRB- having held the WWF World Heavyweight Championship , ECW Championship , and WWE 's World Heavyweight Championship once each -RRB- and a 12-time world tag team champion , having held the WWF/E -LRB- World -RRB- Tag Team Championship , WCW Tag Team Championship , and WWE Tag Team Championships with various partners .
He is also a two-time WWE Intercontinental Champion and a 2010 Money in the Bank winner .
Kane is the third man to win the WWE Grand Slam .
Kane also holds the all-time record of eliminations at Royal Rumble with 44 eliminations .
In 2017 , Jacobs announced his intention to run for the office of mayor of Knox County , Tennessee .