Kangana Ranaut -LRB- -LSB- kəŋɡənaː raːɳoːʈʰ -RSB- ; born 23 March 1986 -RRB- is an Indian film actress .
She has established a career in Bollywood and is one of the highest-paid actresses in India .
Ranaut is particularly known in the media for expressing her honest opinions in public and is frequently credited as one of the most fashionable Indian celebrities .
She is the recipient of several awards , including three National Film Awards and Filmfare Awards in four categories .
Born in Bhambla , a small town in Himachal Pradesh , Ranaut initially aspired to become a doctor at the insistence of her parents .
Determined to build her own career path , she relocated to Delhi at age sixteen , where she briefly became a model .
After training under the theatre director Arvind Gaur , Ranaut made her feature film debut in the 2006 thriller Gangster , for which she was awarded the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut .
She received praise for portraying emotionally intense characters in the dramas Woh Lamhe -LRB- 2006 -RRB- , Life in a. .
.
Metro -LRB- 2007 -RRB- and Fashion -LRB- 2008 -RRB- .
For the last of these , she won the National Film Award for Best Supporting Actress and a Filmfare Award in the same category .
Ranaut featured in the commercially successful films Raaz : The Mystery Continues -LRB- 2009 -RRB- and Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai -LRB- 2010 -RRB- , though she was criticised for being typecast in neurotic roles .
A comic role opposite R. Madhavan in the 2011 box office hit Tanu Weds Manu was well-received , though this was followed by a series of brief , glamorous roles in films that failed to propel her career forward .
She then played a mutant opposite Hrithik Roshan in the science fiction film Krrish 3 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- , one of the highest-grossing Bollywood films , and won the Filmfare and National Film Award for Best Actress for her performance in the comedy-drama Queen -LRB- 2014 -RRB- .
In 2015 , Ranaut portrayed a dual role in Tanu Weds Manu Returns , the most successful Bollywood film featuring a female protagonist , for which she won a Filmfare Critics Award and a second consecutive National Film Award for Best Actress .