Kareena Kapoor -LRB- -LSB- kəˈriːnaː kəˈpuːr -RSB- ; born 21 September 1980 -RRB- , also known by her married name Kareena Kapoor Khan , is an Indian actress who appears in Hindi films .
She is the daughter of actors Randhir Kapoor and Babita , and the younger sister of actress Karisma Kapoor .
Noted for playing a variety of characters in a range of film genres -- from romantic comedies to crime dramas -- Kapoor is the recipient of several awards , including six Filmfare Awards , and is one of Bollywood 's most popular and highest-paid actresses .
After making her acting debut in the 2000 war film Refugee , Kapoor established herself in Hindi cinema with roles in the historical drama Aśoka , and the blockbuster melodrama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... -LRB- both 2001 -RRB- .
This initial success was followed by a series of commercial failures and repetitive roles , which garnered her negative reviews .
The year 2004 marked a turning point for Kapoor when she played against type in the role of a sex worker in the drama Chameli .
She subsequently earned wide critical recognition for her portrayal of a riot victim in the 2004 drama Dev and a character based on William Shakespeare 's heroine Desdemona in the 2006 crime film Omkara .
She went on to receive Filmfare Awards for Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress for her performances in the 2007 romantic comedy Jab We Met and the 2010 drama We Are Family , respectively .
Kapoor achieved further success by featuring as the female lead in two of India 's top-grossing productions -- the 2009 comedy-drama 3 Idiots and the 2015 social drama Bajrangi Bhaijaan -- and received praise for her roles in the 2009 thriller Kurbaan and the 2012 drama Heroine .
Married to actor Saif Ali Khan , with whom she has a son , Kapoor 's off-screen life is the subject of widespread coverage in India .
She has a reputation for being outspoken and assertive , and is recognised for her contributions to the film industry through her fashion style and film roles .
In addition to film acting , Kapoor is a stage performer and has contributed as a co-author to three books : an autobiographical memoir and two nutrition guides .
She has also launched her own clothing line in association with the retail chain Globus .