Katrina Kaif -LRB- -LSB- kəˈʈriːnaː ˈkɛːf -RSB- , born Katrina Turquotte , 16 July 1983 -RRB- is a British film actress and model known for her work in Indian films .
She has appeared primarily in Hindi films , as well as Telugu and Malayalam films .
In addition to being one of Bollywood 's highest-paid actresses , she is considered one of India 's most attractive celebrities by media .
Born in Hong Kong , Kaif and her family lived in several countries before she moved to London .
She received her first modelling assignment as a teenager and later pursued a career as a fashion model .
At a fashion show in London , filmmaker Kaizad Gustad spotted Kaif and decided to cast her in Boom -LRB- 2003 -RRB- , a critical and commercial failure .
While filming in India , Kaif received modelling assignments and established a successful modelling career .
However , filmmakers were hesitant to cast her due to her poor command of Hindi .
After appearing in the Telugu film , Malliswari -LRB- 2004 -RRB- , Kaif earned commercial success in Bollywood with the romantic comedies Maine Pyaar Kyun Kiya ?
-LRB- 2005 -RRB- and Namastey London -LRB- 2007 -RRB- .
She followed with a series of box-office hits , but was criticised for her acting , repetitive roles and inclination to male-dominated films .
Kaif 's performance in the 2009 terrorism drama New York was better received , earning her a Filmfare Award for Best Actress nomination .
After roles in Ajab Prem Ki Ghazab Kahani -LRB- 2009 -RRB- , Raajneeti -LRB- 2010 -RRB- and Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara -LRB- 2011 -RRB- , she received her second Filmfare nomination for her performance in Mere Brother Ki Dulhan -LRB- 2011 -RRB- .
Kaif featured in the thrillers Ek Tha Tiger -LRB- 2012 -RRB- and Dhoom 3 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- , both of which rank among the highest-grossing Bollywood films of all time .
Despite receiving mixed reviews from critics for her acting prowess , she has established herself as a commercially successful actress of Hindi cinema .
In addition to acting , Kaif is involved with her mother 's charity and participates in stage shows .
She is guarded about her personal life , which is a subject of media scrutiny , as is her background .