Keanu Charles Reeves -LRB- -LSB- kiːˈɑːnuː -RSB- ; born September 2 , 1964 -RRB- is a Canadian actor , director , producer , and musician .
Reeves is best known for his acting career , beginning in 1985 and spanning more than three decades .
He gained fame for his starring role performances in several blockbuster films including comedies from the Bill and Ted franchise -LRB- 1989 -- 1991 -RRB- ; action thrillers Point Break -LRB- 1991 -RRB- , Speed -LRB- 1994 -RRB- , and the John Wick franchise ; psychological thriller The Devil 's Advocate -LRB- 1997 -RRB- ; supernatural thriller Constantine -LRB- 2005 -RRB- ; and science fiction/action series The Matrix -LRB- 1999 -- 2003 -RRB- .
He has also appeared in dramatic films such as Dangerous Liaisons -LRB- 1988 -RRB- , My Own Private Idaho -LRB- 1991 -RRB- , and Little Buddha -LRB- 1993 -RRB- , as well as the romantic horror Bram Stoker 's Dracula -LRB- 1992 -RRB- .
Since becoming active in the film industry , Reeves has earned critical acclaim .
One New York Times critic praised Reeves ' versatility , saying that he `` displays considerable discipline and range ... he moves easily between the buttoned-down demeanor that suits a police procedural story and the loose-jointed manner of his comic roles '' .
However , Reeves has spent much of his later career being typecast .
A recurring character arc in many roles he has portrayed is one of saving the world , as can be seen in the characters of Ted Logan , Buddha , Neo , Johnny Mnemonic , John Constantine , and Klaatu .
His acting has garnered several awards , including a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame .
During his film career , Reeves has engaged in several forms of artistic expression .
Active as a musician for over a decade , he played bass guitar for the bands Dogstar and Becky .
Acting onstage , he performed as Prince Hamlet for the Manitoba Theatre Centre 's production of Hamlet .
He wrote the text for a picture book , Ode to Happiness , illustrated by Alexandra Grant .
He has also produced a documentary , Side by Side , and directed the martial arts film Man of Tai Chi .