Keith Lionel Urban -LRB- born 26 October 1967 -RRB- is a New Zealand-born Australian country musician .
In 1991 , he released a self-titled debut album and charted four singles in Australia before moving to the United States the following year .
He found work as a session guitarist before starting a band known as The Ranch , which recorded one studio album on Capitol Nashville and charted two singles on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart .
Still signed to Capitol , Urban made his solo American debut in 1999 with a second eponymous album .
Certified platinum in the US , it produced his first number one on Hot Country Songs with `` But for the Grace of God '' .
`` Somebody Like You '' , the first single from his second Capitol album , Golden Road -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , was named by Billboard as the biggest country hit of the 2000s decade .
The album 's fourth single , `` You 'll Think of Me '' , earned him his first Grammy .
2004 's Be Here , his third American album , produced three more number 1 singles and became his highest-selling album , earning 4 × Platinum certification .
Love , Pain & the Whole Crazy Thing was released in 2006 , containing `` Once in a Lifetime '' as well as his second Grammy song , `` Stupid Boy '' .
A greatest hits package entitled Greatest Hits : 18 Kids followed in late 2007 .
Defying Gravity and Get Closer were released on 31 March 2009 and 16 November 2010 , respectively .
In September 2013 , he released a brand new album titled Fuse , which produced four more number ones on the Country Airplay chart , two of which are duets -- one with Miranda Lambert and the other with Eric Church .
A new single , entitled `` John Cougar , John Deere , John 3:16 '' , was released in June 2015 as the lead-off single to his eighth American studio album Ripcord .
The album later produced the Country Airplay number one hits '' Break on Me '' , `` Wasted Time '' and `` Blue Ai n't Your Color '' , with the latter also becoming Urban 's longest reigning number one on the Hot Country Songs chart spending twelve weeks at number one .
Urban has released a total of nine studio albums -LRB- one of which was released only in the United Kingdom -RRB- , as well as one album with The Ranch .
He has charted 37 singles on the US Hot Country Songs , 18 of which went to number one , counting a duet with Brad Paisley and the 2008 single `` You Look Good in My Shirt '' , which he previously recorded on Golden Road .
Those also include his third Grammy Award-winning single `` Sweet Thing '' from his album Defying Gravity .
Urban is also known for his roles as a coach on the Australian version of the singing competition The Voice and as a judge on American Idol .
Since 2006 , he has been married to actress Nicole Kidman .
In October 2013 , Urban introduced his own signature line of guitars and accessories .