Kerala -LRB- -LSB- ˈkɛrələ -RSB- -RRB- historically known as Keralam , is an Indian state in South India on the Malabar Coast .
It was formed on 1 November 1956 following the States Reorganisation Act by combining Malayalam-speaking regions .
Spread over 38863 km2 , it is bordered by Karnataka to the north and northeast , Tamil Nadu to the east and south , and the Lakshadweep Sea to the west .
With 33,387,677 inhabitants as per the 2011 Census , Kerala is the thirteenth-largest Indian state by population and is divided into 14 districts with the capital being Thiruvananthapuram .
Malayalam is the most widely spoken language and is also the official language of the state .
The region has been a prominent spice exporter since 3000 BCE .
The Chera Dynasty was the first prominent kingdom based in Kerala , though it frequently struggled against attacks by the neighbouring Cholas and Pandyas .
In the 15th century , the spice trade attracted Portuguese traders to Kerala , and paved the way for the European colonisation of India .
After independence , Travancore and Cochin joined the Republic of India and Travancore-Cochin was given the status of a state in 1949 .
In 1956 , Kerala state was formed by merging Malabar district , Travancore-Cochin -LRB- excluding four southern taluks of Kanyakumari district -RRB- , and the taluk of Kasaragod -LRB- now Kasaragod District -RRB- , South Kanara .
Kerala has the lowest positive population growth rate in India , 3.44 % ; highest Human Development Index -LRB- HDI -RRB- , 0.712 in 2015 ; the highest literacy rate , 93.91 % in the 2011 census ; the highest life expectancy , 77 years ; and the highest sex ratio , 1,084 women per 1000 men .
The state has witnessed significant emigration , especially to Arab states of the Persian Gulf during the Gulf Boom of the 1970s and early 1980s , and its economy depends significantly on remittances from a large Malayali expatriate community .
Hinduism is practised by more than half of the population , followed by Islam and Christianity .
The culture is a synthesis of Aryan and Dravidian cultures , developed over millennia , under influences from other parts of India and abroad .
The production of pepper and natural rubber contributes significantly to the total national output .
In the agricultural sector , coconut , tea , coffee , cashew and spices are important .
The state 's coastline extends for 595 km , and around 1.1 million people in the state are dependent on the fishery industry which contributes 3 % to the state 's income .
The state has the highest media exposure in India with newspapers publishing in nine languages , mainly English and Malayalam .
Kerala is one of the prominent tourist destinations of India , with backwaters , beaches , Ayurvedic tourism and tropical greenery as its major attractions .