Kerplunk is the second studio album by American punk rock band Green Day , released on December 17 , 1991 by Lookout !
Records .
Kerplunk was Green Day 's last release on the Lookout Records label , and was also the first album to feature Tré Cool on drums .
The album sold 10,000 copies its first day and became Lookout !
's biggest selling release .
After debuting it to their fans in the Berkeley , California area and receiving much approval from the critical 924 Gilman Street crowd , the band packed up in a cramped , converted Book Mobile and headed east .
Green Day developed a fan base on the east coast behind the touring support of grassroots promoter , Jak Werz .
The opportunity paid off as album sales reached over 50,000 copies .
Along with the successful live shows , major labels took notice of Kerplunk '' 's phenomenal popularity , as a result , many approached the band .
Green Day realized that they had outgrown their record distribution capacity with Lookout !
and eventually signed with Reprise Records .
With Reprise , Green Day recorded and released their next album Dookie -LRB- 1994 -RRB- .
The album officially includes only 12 tracks , but the versions released on CD and cassette also include the 4 tracks from the Sweet Children EP .
One of those tracks is a cover of The Who 's `` My Generation '' .
In August 2005 , Green Day pulled the album , as well as all of their other material released through the Lookout !
label due to unpaid royalties .
It was reissued on CD by Reprise Records , who Green Day has been with since leaving Lookout !
, on January 9 , 2007 .
In Europe , the album was released by Epitaph Europe , and has remained in print .
It was reissued on vinyl on March 24 , 2009 by Reprise Records and includes a reissue of the Sweet Children EP .
There were no official singles released from the album , although `` 2000 Light Years Away '' and `` Christie Road '' were released as mock-up singles in a Green Day singles box set entitled Green Day : Ultimate Collectors .
As of November 2013 , Kerplunk '' has sold more than 1,000,000 copies in the United States and more than 4,000,000 copies worldwide .
The album has gone on to be among the best selling independently released albums of all time .