Kesha Rose Sebert -LRB- -LSB- ˈkɛʃə_roʊz_ˈsɛbərt -RSB- ; born March 1 , 1987 ; formerly stylized as Ke $ ha -RRB- is an American singer , songwriter , and rapper .
In 2005 , at age 18 , Kesha was signed to producer Dr. Luke 's label Kemosabe Records .
Her breakthrough came in early 2009 after appearing on American rapper Flo Rida 's number-one single `` Right Round '' .
Her debut album , Animal , and her first extended play , Cannibal , were released in 2010 .
Kesha 's music and image propelled her to immediate commercial success , with Animal debuting as the number-one album in the United States .
She also achieved 3 more number-one singles , `` Tik Tok '' and `` We R Who We R '' as a solo artist , and `` Timber '' as a featured artist , and a string of top-ten singles from the album and its re-release .
At the same time , she continued to write songs for other artists , including `` Till the World Ends '' for Britney Spears .
Warrior , her second studio album , was released in 2012 , spawning her eighth top-ten single `` Die Young '' .
`` Tik Tok '' , at one point , was the best-selling digital single in history , selling over 14 million units internationally .
Kesha has been involved with animal rights and LGBT activism .
She has received several awards and nominations , including her win for MTV Europe Music Award for Best New Act in 2010 .
As of November 2013 , she has reportedly sold over 33 million records -LRB- albums , tracks , and ringtones -RRB- in the United States and 60 million records worldwide .
Her recorded output has been curtailed since 2013 due to a legal dispute with her former producer Dr. Luke , in which a series of lawsuits -LRB- known collectively as Kesha v. Dr. Luke -RRB- were exchanged between the two parties .
Kesha alleged physical and emotional abuse and employment discrimination against Dr. Luke , while Dr. Luke claims breach of contract and defamation against Kesha .
Kesha has not released any solo studio recordings during the legal dispute , but has continued to perform live , and has appeared as a guest musician in collaborations with other artists , including Zedd , Ben Folds , and The Flaming Lips .