Kim Jong-il -LRB- , -LSB- kim.dzʌŋ.il -RSB- or -LSB- kim -RSB- -LSB- tsʌŋ.il -RSB- 16 February 1941/1942 -- 17 December 2011 -RRB- was the supreme leader of the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea -LRB- DPRK -RRB- , commonly referred to as North Korea , from 1994 to 2011 .
By the early 1980s Kim had become the heir apparent for the leadership of the country and assumed important posts in the party and army organs .
He succeeded his father and founder of the DPRK , Kim Il-sung , following the elder Kim 's death in 1994 .
Kim Jong-il was the General Secretary of the Workers ' Party of Korea -LRB- WPK -RRB- , Politburo Standing Committee member of WPK , Chairman of the National Defence Commission -LRB- NDC -RRB- of North Korea , and the Supreme Commander of the Korean People 's Army -LRB- KPA -RRB- , the fourth-largest standing army in the world .
Kim 's leadership is thought to have been even more authoritarian than his father 's .
During Kim 's regime , the country suffered from famine , partially due to economic mismanagement , and had a poor human rights record .
Kim involved his country in state terrorism and strengthened the role of the military by his Songun , or `` military-first '' , politics .
Kim 's rule also saw tentative economic reforms , including the opening of the Kaesong Industrial Park in 2003 .
In April 2009 , North Korea 's constitution was amended to officially refer to him -LRB- and his later successors -RRB- as the `` supreme leader of the DPRK '' .
The most common colloquial title given to him during his reign was `` The Dear Leader '' to distinguish him from his father Kim Il-sung , `` The Great Leader '' .
Following Kim 's failure to appear at important public events in 2008 , foreign observers assumed that Kim had either fallen seriously ill or died .
On 19 December 2011 , the North Korean government announced that he had died two days earlier , whereupon his third son , Kim Jong-un , was promoted to a senior position in the ruling WPK and succeeded him .
After his death , he was designated as the `` Eternal General Secretary '' of the WPK and the `` Eternal Chairman of the National Defence Commission '' , in keeping with the tradition of establishing eternal posts for the dead members of the Kim dynasty .