Kuching -LSB- ˈkuːtʃɪŋ -RSB- -LRB- Jawi : , -RRB- , officially the City of Kuching , is the capital and the most populous city in the state of Sarawak in Malaysia .
It is also the capital of Kuching Division .
The city is situated on the Sarawak River at the southwest tip of the state of Sarawak on the island of Borneo and covers an area of 431 km2 with a population about 165,642 in the Kuching North administrative region and 159,490 in the Kuching South administrative regiona total of 325,132 people .
Kuching was the third capital of Sarawak in 1827 during the administration of the Bruneian Empire .
In 1841 , Kuching became the capital of Sarawak after Sarawak was ceded to James Brooke for helping the Bruneian empire in crushing a rebellion particularly the interior borneo dweller Dayak people who later became his loyal followers .
The town continued to receive attention and development during the rule of Charles Brooke such as the construction of a sanitation system , hospital , prison , fort , and a bazaar .
In 1941 , the Brooke administration had a Centenary Celebration in Kuching .
During World War II , Kuching was occupied by Japanese forces from 1942 to 1945 .
The Japanese government set up a Batu Lintang camp near Kuching to hold prisoners of war and civilian internees .
After the war , the town survived intact .
However , the last Rajah of Sarawak , Sir Charles Vyner Brooke decided to cede Sarawak as part of British Crown Colony in 1946 .
Kuching remained as capital during the Crown Colony period .
After the formation of Malaysia in 1963 , Kuching retained its status as state capital and was granted city status in 1988 .
Since then , the Kuching city is divided into two administrative regions managed by two separate local authorities .
The administrative centre of Sarawak state government is located at Wisma Bapa Malaysia , Kuching .
Kuching is a major food destination for tourists and the main gateway for travellers visiting Sarawak and Borneo .
Kuching Wetlands National Park is located about 30 km from the city and there are many other tourist attractions in and around Kuching such as Bako National Park , Semenggoh Wildlife Centre , Rainforest World Music Festival -LRB- RWMF -RRB- , state assembly building , The Astana , Fort Margherita , Kuching Cat Museum , and Sarawak State Museum .
The city has become one of the major industrial and commercial centres in East Malaysia .