Kung Fu Panda is a 2008 American computer-animated action comedy martial arts film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by Paramount Pictures .
It was directed by John Stevenson and Mark Osborne and produced by Melissa Cobb , and stars the voices of Jack Black , Dustin Hoffman , Angelina Jolie , Ian McShane , Seth Rogen , Lucy Liu , David Cross , Randall Duk Kim , James Hong , and Jackie Chan .
Set in a version of ancient China populated by anthropomorphic talking animals , the plot revolves around a bumbling panda named Po who aspires to be a kung fu master .
When an evil kung fu warrior is foretold to escape after twenty years in prison , Po is unwittingly named the chosen one destined to defeat him and bring peace to the land , much to the chagrin of the resident kung fu warriors .
The idea for the film was conceived by Michael Lachance , a DreamWorks Animation executive .
The film was originally intended to be a parody , but director Stevenson decided instead , to shoot an action comedy wuxia film that incorporates the hero 's journey narrative archetype for the lead character .
The computer animation in the film was more complex than anything DreamWorks had done before .
As with most DreamWorks animated films , Hans Zimmer -LRB- collaborating with John Powell this time -RRB- scored Kung Fu Panda .
He visited China to absorb the culture and get to know the China National Symphony Orchestra as part of his preparation .
A sequel , Kung Fu Panda 2 , was released on May 26 , 2011 , along with a television series , Kung Fu Panda : Legends of Awesomeness later that same year as a part of a franchise .
A second sequel called Kung Fu Panda 3 was released on January 29 , 2016 .
Kung Fu Panda premiered in the United States on June 6 , 2008 .
The film received critical acclaim upon release .
Kung Fu Panda opened in 4,114 theaters , grossing $ 20.3 million on its opening day and $ 60.2 million on its opening weekend , resulting in the number one position at the box office .
The film became DreamWorks ' biggest opening for a non-sequel film , the highest grossing animated film of the year worldwide , and also had the fourth-largest opening weekend for a DreamWorks animated film at the American and Canadian box office , behind Shrek 2 , Shrek the Third , and Shrek Forever After .