Lahore -LRB- -LSB- lə ` hɔər -RSB- -RRB- -LRB- -LSB- , -LSB- -RRB- is the capital city of the Pakistani province of Punjab .
It is the second most populous city in Pakistan and the 32nd most populous city in the world .
The city is located in the north-eastern end of Pakistan 's Punjab province , near the border with the Indian state of Punjab .
Lahore is ranked as a beta - world city , and is one of Pakistan 's wealthiest cities with an estimated GDP of $ 58.14 billion -LRB- PPP -RRB- as of 2014 .
Lahore is the historic cultural centre of the Punjab region , and is the largest Punjabi city in the world .
The city has a long history , and was once under the rule of the Hindu Shahis , Ghaznavids , Ghurids , and the Delhi Sultanate .
Lahore reached the height of its splendour under the Mughal Empire , serving as its capital city for a number of years .
The city was captured by the forces of Persian Safavid Emperor Nader Shah during his invasion of the Mughal Empire .
The city was then contested between different powers before it became capital of the Sikh Empire , and then the capital of the Punjab under British rule .
Lahore was central to the independence movements of both India and Pakistan , with the city being the site of both the declaration of Indian Independence , and the resolution calling for the establishment of Pakistan .
Following the independence of Pakistan in 1947 , Lahore became the capital of Pakistan 's Punjab province .
Lahore is one of Pakistan 's most liberal and cosmopolitan cities .
It exerts a strong cultural influence over Pakistan .
Lahore is a major centre for Pakistan 's publishing industry , and remains the foremost centre of Pakistan 's literary scene .
The city is also a major centre of education in Pakistan , with some of Pakistan 's leading universities based in the city .
Lahore is also home to Pakistan 's film industry , Lollywood , and is a major centre of Qawwali music .
The city also hosts much of Pakistan 's tourist industry , with major attractions including the old Walled City , and the Badshahi and Wazir Khan mosques .
Lahore is also home to the UNESCO World Heritage Sites of Lahore Fort and Shalimar Gardens .