Las Vegas -LRB- -LSB- lɑːs_ˈveɪɡəs -RSB- , Spanish for `` The Meadows '' -RRB- , officially the City of Las Vegas and often known simply as Vegas , is the 28th-most populated city in the United States , the most populated city in the state of Nevada , and the county seat of Clark County .
The city anchors the Las Vegas Valley metropolitan area and is the largest city within the greater Mojave Desert .
Las Vegas is an internationally renowned major resort city known primarily for its gambling , shopping , fine dining , entertainment , and nightlife .
It is the leading financial , commercial , and cultural center for Nevada .
The city bills itself as The Entertainment Capital of the World , and is famous for its mega casino -- hotels and associated activities .
It is a top three destination in the United States for business conventions and a global leader in the hospitality industry , claiming more AAA Five Diamond hotels than any city in the world .
Today , Las Vegas annually ranks as one of the world 's most visited tourist destinations .
The city 's tolerance for numerous forms of adult entertainment earned it the title of Sin City , and has made Las Vegas a popular setting for literature , films , television programs , and music videos .
Las Vegas was settled in 1905 and officially incorporated in 1911 .
At the close of the 20th century , it was the most populated American city founded within that century -LRB- a similar distinction earned by Chicago in the 1800s -RRB- .
Population growth has accelerated since the 1960s , and between 1990 and 2000 the population nearly doubled , increasing by 85.2 % .
Rapid growth has continued into the 21st century , and according to a 2013 estimate , the population is 603,488 with a regional population of 2,027,828 .
`` Las Vegas '' is often used to describe areas beyond official city limits -- especially the areas on and near the Las Vegas Strip , which is actually located within the unincorporated communities of Paradise , Winchester , and Enterprise .