The law of value -LRB- German : Wertgesetz -RRB- is a central concept in Karl Marx 's critique of political economy , first expounded in his polemic The Poverty of Philosophy -LRB- 1847 -RRB- against Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , with reference to David Ricardo 's economics.See Marx , The Poverty of Philosophy , chapter 1 part 2 where Marx refers to Proudhon 's own `` law of value '' and chapter 3 , titled `` Application of the Law of the Proportionality of Value '' .
Most generally , it refers to a regulative principle of the economic exchange of the products of human work : the relative exchange-values of those products in trade , usually expressed by money-prices , are proportional to the average amounts of human labor-time which are currently socially necessary to produce them.Karl Marx , Capital , Volume I , Penguin , pp. 676 -- 77 ; Marx , Capital , Volume III , Penguin ed. , p. 522 .
Thus , the fluctuating exchange value of commodities -LRB- exchangeable products -RRB- is regulated by their value , where the magnitude of their value is determined by the average quantity of human labour which is currently socially necessary to produce them -LRB- see labor theory of value and value-form -RRB- .
In itself , this theorem is fairly simple to understand , and intuitively it makes sense to many working people .
Theorizing its implications is , however , a much more complex task ; it kept Marx busy across more than two decades .
When Marx talked about `` value relationships '' or `` value proportions '' -LRB- German : Wertverhältnisse -RRB- , he did not mean `` the money '' or `` the price '' .
Instead , he meant the value proportions that exist between products of human labour .
These relationships can be expressed by the relative replacement costs of products , as labour hours worked .
The more labour it costs to make a product , the more it is worth , and inversely the less labour it costs to make a product , the less it is worth .
Money-prices are at best only an expression or reflection of Marx 's value relationships -- accurately or very inaccurately .
Products can be traded above or below their value in market trade , and some prices have nothing to do with product-values at all -LRB- in Marx 's sense -RRB- , because they refer to tradeable objects which are not regularly produced and reproduced by human labour , or because they refer only to claims on financial assets .