LeBron Raymone James -LRB- -LSB- ləˈbrɒn -RSB- born December 30 , 1984 -RRB- is an American professional basketball player for the Cleveland Cavaliers of the National Basketball Association -LRB- NBA -RRB- .
James has won three NBA championships , four NBA Most Valuable Player Awards , three NBA Finals MVP Awards , two Olympic gold medals , an NBA scoring title , and the NBA Rookie of the Year Award .
He has also been selected to 13 NBA All-Star teams , 13 All-NBA teams , and six All-Defensive teams , and is the Cavaliers ' all-time leading scorer .
James played high school basketball at St. Vincent -- St. Mary High School in his hometown of Akron , Ohio , where he was highly promoted in the national media as a future NBA superstar .
After graduating , he was selected by his home team , the Cleveland Cavaliers , as the first overall pick of the 2003 NBA draft .
James led Cleveland to the franchise 's first Finals appearance in 2007 , ultimately losing to the San Antonio Spurs .
In 2010 , he left the Cavaliers for the Miami Heat in a highly publicized ESPN special titled The Decision .
James spent four seasons with the Heat , reaching the Finals all four years and winning back-to-back championships in 2012 and 2013 .
In 2013 , he led Miami on a 27-game winning streak , the third longest in league history .
Following his final season with the Heat , James opted out of his contract and returned to the Cavaliers .
Behind his leadership , Cleveland immediately advanced to two consecutive Finals against the Golden State Warriors , winning the championship in 2016 to end Cleveland 's fifty-two year professional sports title drought .
Off the court , James has accumulated considerable wealth and fame from numerous endorsement contracts .
His public life has been the subject of much scrutiny , and he has been ranked as one of America 's most influential and popular athletes .
He has been featured in books , documentaries , and television commercials .
He also hosted the ESPY Awards , Saturday Night Live , and appeared in the 2015 film Trainwreck .