Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci -LRB- -LSB- leoˈnardo di ˌsɛr ˈpjɛːro da -LRB- v -RRB- ˈvintʃi -RSB- ; 15 April 14522 May 1519 -RRB- , more commonly Leonardo da Vinci or simply Leonardo , was an Italian polymath whose areas of interest included invention , painting , sculpting , architecture , science , music , mathematics , engineering , literature , anatomy , geology , astronomy , botany , writing , history , and cartography .
He has been variously called the father of palaeontology , ichnology , and architecture , and is widely considered one of the greatest painters of all time .
Sometimes credited with the inventions of the parachute , helicopter and tank , he epitomised the Renaissance humanist ideal .
Many historians and scholars regard Leonardo as the prime exemplar of the `` Universal Genius '' or `` Renaissance Man '' , an individual of `` unquenchable curiosity '' and `` feverishly inventive imagination '' .
According to art historian Helen Gardner , the scope and depth of his interests were without precedent in recorded history , and `` his mind and personality seem to us superhuman , while the man himself mysterious and remote '' .
Marco Rosci notes that while there is much speculation regarding his life and personality , his view of the world was logical rather than mysterious , and that the empirical methods he employed were unorthodox for his time .
Born out of wedlock to a notary , Piero da Vinci , and a peasant woman , Caterina , in Vinci in the region of Florence , Leonardo was educated in the studio of the renowned Florentine painter Andrea del Verrocchio .
Much of his earlier working life was spent in the service of Ludovico il Moro in Milan .
He later worked in Rome , Bologna and Venice , and he spent his last years in France at the home awarded to him by Francis I of France .
Leonardo was , and is , renowned primarily as a painter .
Among his works , the Mona Lisa is the most famous and most parodied portrait and The Last Supper the most reproduced religious painting of all time .
Leonardo 's drawing of the Vitruvian Man is also regarded as a cultural icon , being reproduced on items as varied as the euro coin , textbooks , and T-shirts .
Perhaps fifteen of his paintings have survived.There are 15 significant artworks which are ascribed , either in whole or in large part , to Leonardo by most art historians .
This number is made up principally of paintings on panel but includes a mural , a large drawing on paper and two works which are in the early stages of preparation .
There are a number of other works that have also been variously attributed to Leonardo .
Nevertheless , these few works , together with his notebooks , which contain drawings , scientific diagrams , and his thoughts on the nature of painting , compose a contribution to later generations of artists rivalled only by that of his contemporary , Michelangelo .
Leonardo is revered for his technological ingenuity .
He conceptualised flying machines , a type of armoured fighting vehicle , concentrated solar power , an adding machine , and the double hull .
Relatively few of his designs were constructed or even feasible during his lifetime , as the modern scientific approaches to metallurgy and engineering were only in their infancy during the Renaissance .
Some of his smaller inventions , however , such as an automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the tensile strength of wire , entered the world of manufacturing unheralded .
A number of Leonardo 's most practical inventions are nowadays displayed as working models at the Museum of Vinci .
He made substantial discoveries in anatomy , civil engineering , geology , optics , and hydrodynamics , but he did not publish his findings and they had no direct influence on later science .
Today , Leonardo is widely considered one of the most diversely talented individuals ever to have lived .