Libya is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa , bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the north , Egypt to the east , Sudan to the southeast , Chad and Niger to the south and Algeria and Tunisia to the west .
The country is made of three historical regions , Tripolitania , Fezzan and Cyrenaica .
With an area of almost 1.8 e6km2 , Libya is the fourth largest country in Africa , and is the 16th largest country in the world .
Libya has the 10th-largest proven oil reserves of any country in the world .
The largest city and capital , Tripoli , is located in western Libya and contains over one million of Libya 's six million people .
The other large city is Benghazi , which is located in eastern Libya .
Libya has been inhabited by Berbers since the late Bronze Age .
The Phoenicians established trading posts in western Libya , and ancient Greek colonists established city-states in eastern Libya .
Libya was variously ruled by Carthaginians , Persians , Egyptians and Greeks before becoming a part of the Roman Empire .
Libya was an early centre of Christianity .
After the fall of the Western Roman Empire , the area of Libya was mostly occupied by the Vandals until the 7th century , when invasions brought Islam and Arab colonisation .
In the 16th century , the Spanish Empire and the Knights of St John occupied Tripoli , until Ottoman rule began in 1551 .
Libya was involved in the Barbary Wars of the 18th and 19th centuries .
Ottoman rule continued until the Italian occupation of Libya resulted in the temporary Italian Libya colony from 1911 to 1943 .
During the Second World War Libya was an important area of warfare in the North African Campaign .
The Italian population then went into decline .
Libya became independent as a kingdom in 1951 .
A military coup in 1969 overthrew King Idris I , beginning a period of sweeping social reform .
The most prominent coup figure , Muammar Gaddafi , was ultimately able to have power fully concentrated in his hands during the Libyan Cultural Revolution , remaining in power until the Libyan Civil War of 2011 , fought by those supporting the government and by forces attempting to overthrow it , in which the rebels were supported by NATO .
Since then , Libya has experienced a period of instability .
The European Union is involved in an operation intended to disrupt human trafficking networks exploiting refugees fleeing from wars in Africa for Europe .
As part of the ongoing second Libyan Civil War -LRB- 2014 -- present -RRB- , at least two political bodies claim to be the government of Libya .
The Council of Deputies is one such government , but it does not hold territory in the capital , Tripoli , instead meeting in the Cyrenaica city of Tobruk .
Meanwhile , the UN-backed 2014 General National Congress purports to be the legal continuation of the General National Congress , elected in the 2012 Libyan General National Congress election and dissolved following the June 2014 elections but then reconvened by a minority of its members .
The Supreme Court in the Libya Dawn and General National Congress-controlled Tripoli declared the Tobruk government unconstitutional in November 2014 , but the body has rejected the ruling as made under threat of violence .
Parts of Libya are outside of either government 's control , with various Islamist , rebel , and tribal militias administering some cities and areas .
The United Nations is sponsoring peace talks between the Tobruk - and Tripoli-based factions .
An agreement to form a unified interim government was signed on 17 December 2015 .
Under the terms of the agreement , a nine-member Presidency Council and a seventeen-member interim Government of National Accord would be formed , with a view to holding new elections within two years .
The leaders of the new government , called the Government of National Accord -LRB- GNA -RRB- , arrived in Tripoli on 5 April 2016 .
Since then the GNC , one of the two rival governments , has disbanded to support the new GNA .