LinkedIn -LRB- -LSB- ˌliŋkt.ˈɪn -RSB- -RRB- is a business - and employment-oriented social networking service that operates via websites and mobile apps .
Founded on December 28 , 2002 , and launched on May 5 , 2003 , it is mainly used for professional networking , including employers posting jobs and job seekers posting their CVs .
As of 2015 , most of the company 's revenue came from selling access to information about its members to recruiters and sales professionals .
As of September 2016 , LinkedIn had more than 467 million accounts , out of which more than 106 million are active .
As of April 2017 , LinkedIn had 500 million members in 200 countries .
LinkedIn allows members -LRB- both workers and employers -RRB- to create profiles and `` connections '' to each other in an online social network which may represent real-world professional relationships .
Members can invite anyone -LRB- whether an existing member or not -RRB- to become a connection .
The `` gated-access approach '' -LRB- where contact with any professional requires either an existing relationship or an introduction through a contact of theirs -RRB- is intended to build trust among the service 's members .
LinkedIn participated in the EU 's International Safe Harbor Privacy Principles .
The site has an Alexa Internet ranking as the 20th most popular website .
According to the New York Times , US high school students are now creating LinkedIn profiles to include with their college applications .
Based in the United States , the site is , as of 2013 , available in 24 languages , including Arabic , Chinese , English , French , German , Italian , Portuguese , Spanish , Dutch , Swedish , Danish , Romanian , Russian , Turkish , Japanese , Czech , Polish , Korean , Indonesian , Malay , and Tagalog .
LinkedIn filed for an initial public offering in January 2011 and traded its first shares on May 19 , 2011 , under the NYSE symbol `` LNKD '' .
On June 13 , 2016 , Microsoft announced plans to acquire LinkedIn for $ 26.2 billion .
The acquisition was completed on December 8 , 2016 .
The transaction resulted in the payment of approximately $ 26.4 billion in cash merger consideration .