The lion -LRB- Panthera leo -RRB- is one of the big cats in the genus Panthera and a member of the family Felidae .
The commonly used term African lion collectively denotes the several subspecies in Africa .
With some males exceeding 250 kg in weight , it is the second-largest living cat after the tiger , barring hybrids like the liger .
Wild lions currently exist in sub-Saharan Africa and in India -LRB- where an endangered remnant population resides in and around Gir Forest National Park -RRB- .
In ancient historic times , their range was in most of Africa , including North Africa , and across Eurasia from Greece and southeastern Europe to India .
In the late Pleistocene , about 10,000 years ago , the lion was the most widespread large land mammal after humans : Panthera leo spelaea lived in northern and western Europe and Panthera leo atrox lived in the Americas from the Yukon to Peru .
The lion is classified as a vulnerable species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature -LRB- IUCN -RRB- , having seen a major population decline in its African range of 30 -- 50 % over two decades during the second half of the twentieth century .
Lion populations are untenable outside designated reserves and national parks .
Although the cause of the decline is not fully understood , habitat loss and conflicts with humans are the greatest causes of concern .
Within Africa , the West African lion population is particularly endangered .
In the wilderness , males seldom live longer than 10 to 14 years , as injuries sustained from continual fighting with rival males greatly reduce their longevity .
In captivity they can live more than 20 years .
They typically inhabit savanna and grassland , although they may take to bush and forest .
Lions are unusually social compared to other cats .
A pride of lions consists of related females and offspring and a small number of adult males .
Groups of female lions typically hunt together , preying mostly on large ungulates .
Lions are apex and keystone predators , although they are also expert scavengers obtaining over 50 percent of their food by scavenging as opportunity allows .
While lions do not typically hunt humans , some have .
Sleeping mainly during the day , lions are active primarily at night -LRB- nocturnal -RRB- , although sometimes at twilight -LRB- crepuscular -RRB- .
Highly distinctive , the male lion is easily recognised by its mane , and its face is one of the most widely recognised animal symbols in human culture .
Depictions have existed from the Upper Paleolithic period , with carvings and paintings from the Lascaux and Chauvet Caves in France dated to 17,000 years ago , through virtually all ancient and medieval cultures where they once occurred .
It has been extensively depicted in sculptures , in paintings , on national flags , and in contemporary films and literature .
Lions have been kept in menageries since the time of the Roman Empire , and have been a key species sought for exhibition in zoos over the world since the late eighteenth century .
Zoos are cooperating worldwide in breeding programs for the endangered Asiatic subspecies .