`` Little Boy '' was the codename for the atomic bomb dropped on the Japanese city of Hiroshima on 6 August 1945 during World War II by the Boeing B-29 Superfortress Enola Gay , piloted by Colonel Paul W. Tibbets , Jr. , commander of the 509th Composite Group of the United States Army Air Forces .
It was the first atomic bomb to be used in warfare .
The Hiroshima bombing was the second artificial nuclear explosion in history , after the Trinity test , and the first uranium-based detonation .
It exploded with an energy of approximately 15 ktonTNT .
The bomb caused significant destruction to the city of Hiroshima and its occupants .
Little Boy was developed by Lieutenant Commander Francis Birch 's group of Captain William S. Parsons 's Ordnance -LRB- O -RRB- Division at the Manhattan Project 's Los Alamos Laboratory during World War II .
Parsons flew on the Hiroshima mission as weaponeer .
The Little Boy was a development of the unsuccessful Thin Man nuclear bomb .
Like Thin Man , it was a gun-type fission weapon , but derived its explosive power from the nuclear fission of uranium-235 .
This was accomplished by shooting a hollow cylinder of enriched uranium -LRB- the `` bullet '' -RRB- onto a solid cylinder of the same material -LRB- the `` target '' -RRB- by means of a charge of nitrocellulose propellant powder .
It contained 64 kg of enriched uranium , of which less than a kilogram underwent nuclear fission .
Its components were fabricated at three different plants so that no one would have a copy of the complete design .
After the war ended , it was not expected that the inefficient Little Boy design would ever again be required , and many plans and diagrams were destroyed , but by mid-1946 the Hanford Site reactors were suffering badly from the Wigner effect , so six Little Boy assemblies were produced at Sandia Base .
The Navy Bureau of Ordnance built another 25 Little Boy assemblies in 1947 for use by the Lockheed P2V Neptune nuclear strike aircraft -LRB- which could be launched from but not land on the Midway-class aircraft carriers -RRB- .
All the Little Boy units were withdrawn from service by the end of January 1951 .