Little Mix are a British girl group formed in 2011 during the eighth series of the UK version of The X Factor .
They are the first and , so far , only group to win the competition .
Following their victory , they signed with Simon Cowell 's record label Syco Music and released a cover of Damien Rice 's `` Cannonball '' as their winner 's single .
The members are Jade Thirlwall , Perrie Edwards , Leigh-Anne Pinnock , and Jesy Nelson .
Little Mix released their debut album DNA in 2012 , which peaked inside the top 10 in ten countries including the UK and US .
This made Little Mix the first girl group since the Pussycat Dolls to reach the US top 5 with their debut album , as well as earning the highest debut US chart position by a British girl group , breaking the record previously held by the Spice Girls .
In the UK , the album spawned the number-one single `` Wings '' .
The group 's sophomore effort Salute , which was released in 2013 , became their second album to debut inside the top 10 in both the UK and US .
The album produced two top 10 singles in their home country ; `` Move '' and `` Salute '' .
Little Mix released their third studio album Get Weird in 2015 and it is their best-selling and longest charting album to date in the UK .
The album 's lead single `` Black Magic '' reached number one in the UK and was also nominated for two Brit Awards in 2016 .
The group 's 2016 fourth studio album Glory Days became their first number one album in the UK and was also the longest reigning girl group Number 1 since the Spice Girls ' debut album 20 years ago .
The album 's lead single `` Shout Out to My Ex '' became the group 's fourth UK number one single , while the second single `` Touch '' became the group 's tenth top ten hit in the UK Singles Chart .
The group won Best British Single for `` Shout Out to My Ex '' at the 2017 Brit Awards , they have also received several other awards during their career , including two MTV Europe Music Awards , two Teen Choice Awards and two Glamour Awards .
As of October 2016 the group has achieved four platinum certified albums and eleven certified singles in the UK .
With four UK number one singles and highest first week UK album sales for a girl band since the Spice Girls , Little Mix are one of the most successful female acts in contemporary British popular culture : they appeared on Debrett 's 2017 list of the most influential people in the UK .
Little Mix currently holds the record for the most VEVO Certified Videos for a British female artist , pushing Adele into second place , and also the most certified videos for a girl group .
The group has 10 certified videos in total .