Liverpool -LRB- -LSB- ˈlɪvərpuːl -RSB- -RRB- is a city in North West England , with an estimated population of 478,580 in 2015 .
With its surrounding areas it is the fifth largest metropolitan area in the UK , with over 2.24 million people in 2011 .
The local authority is Liverpool City Council , the most populous local government district within the metropolitan county of Merseyside and the largest within the Liverpool City Region .
Liverpool sits on the eastern side of the Mersey Estuary , and historically lay within the ancient hundred of West Derby in the south west of the county of Lancashire .
It became a borough in 1207 and a city in 1880 .
In 1889 , it became a county borough independent of Lancashire .
Its growth as a major port was paralleled by the expansion of the city throughout the Industrial Revolution .
Along with general cargo , freight , raw materials such as coal and cotton , the city was also involved in the Atlantic slave trade .
Liverpool was home to both the Cunard and White Star Line , and was the port of registry of the ocean liner RMS Titanic , the RMS Lusitania , Queen Mary and Olympic .
The popularity of The Beatles and other groups from the Merseybeat era contributes to Liverpool 's status as a tourist destination .
Liverpool is also the home of two Premier League football clubs , Liverpool and Everton , matches between the two being known as the Merseyside derby .
The city 's namesake club is the sole British club to win five European Cups .
The world-famous Grand National horse race takes place annually at Aintree Racecourse on the outskirts of the city .
The city celebrated its 800th anniversary in 2007 , and was European Capital of Culture together with Stavanger , Norway , in 2008 .
Several areas of the city centre were granted World Heritage Site status by UNESCO in 2004 .
The Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City includes the Pier Head , Albert Dock , and William Brown Street .
Liverpool 's status as a port city has contributed to its diverse population , which , historically , was drawn from a wide range of peoples , cultures , and religions , particularly from Ireland and Wales .
The city is also home to the oldest Black African community in the country and the oldest Chinese community in Europe .
Natives of the city of Liverpool are referred to as Liverpudlians , and colloquially as `` Scousers '' , a reference to `` scouse '' , a form of stew .
The word `` Scouse '' has also become synonymous with the Liverpool accent and dialect .
Another term for denizens of the city is Liverpolitan , although Liverpolitan may also be used for residents of the wider Liverpool City Region .