Live Nation Entertainment is an American global entertainment company , formed from the merger of Live Nation and Ticketmaster .
It owns , leases , operates , has booking rights for and/or equity interests in a large number of U.S. entertainment venues .
The leadership consists of Greg Maffei -LRB- chief executive officer of Liberty Media -RRB- as chairman and Canadian Michael Rapino -LRB- previously chief executive officer of Live Nation -RRB- as president and CEO of the company .
The merger that formed the company was opposed by members of the United States Congress , business rivals , and the Computer & Communications Industry Association -LRB- CCIA -RRB- , whose members include Google , Oracle , Microsoft , Yahoo , Intuit , and eBay .
The merger initially received regulatory approval in Norway and Turkey in 2009 .
In October 2009 , the United Kingdom 's Competition Commission provisionally ruled against the merger .
On December 22 , 2009 , the Competition Commission reversed its decision and cleared the proposed merger .
The United States Justice Department approved the merger on January 25 , 2010 , with some conditions to which both parties agreed .
As part of the agreement with governments to merge , Ticketmaster had to sell its ownership in its self-ticketing company , Paciolan and Live Nation Entertainment was placed under a 10-year court order prohibiting it from retaliating against venues that choose to accept competitors ' ticket-selling contracts , and it `` must allow venues that sign deals elsewhere to take consumer ticketing data with them '' .
In addition , the new company had to license a copy of its ticketing software to two companies -- Anschutz Entertainment Group -LRB- AEG -RRB- and either Comcast Spectacor or another `` suitable '' company -- so that both companies could compete `` head-to-head '' with Ticketmaster for venues ' business .
AEG was given the option after five years to buy the software , replacing it with something else , or partnering with another ticketing company .
Live Nation Entertainment bought AC Entertainment , a Knoxville Tennessee music company in October 2016 .