The Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II is a family of single-seat , single-engine , all-weather stealth multirole fighters .
The fifth-generation combat aircraft is designed to perform ground attack and air defense missions .
It has three main models : the F-35A conventional takeoff and landing -LRB- CTOL -RRB- variant , the F-35B short take-off and vertical-landing -LRB- STOVL -RRB- variant , and the F-35C carrier-based Catapult Assisted Take-Off Barrier Arrested Recovery -LRB- CATOBAR -RRB- variant .
On 31 July 2015 , the United States Marines declared ready for deployment the first squadron of F-35B fighters after intensive testing .
On 2 August 2016 , the U.S. Air Force declared its first squadron of F-35A fighters combat-ready .
The F-35 descends from the X-35 , the winning design of the Joint Strike Fighter -LRB- JSF -RRB- program .
An aerospace industry team led by Lockheed Martin designed and manufactures it .
Other major F-35 industry partners include Northrop Grumman , Pratt & Whitney and BAE Systems .
The F-35 first flew on 15 December 2006 .
The United States plans to buy 2,663 aircraft .
Its variants are to provide the bulk of the crewed tactical airpower of the U.S. Air Force , Navy and the Marine Corps over the coming decades .
Deliveries of the F-35 for the U.S. military are scheduled until 2037 with a projected service life up to 2070 .
The United States principally funds the F-35 JSF development , with additional funding from partners .
The partner nations are either NATO members or close U.S. allies .
The United Kingdom , Italy , Australia , Canada , Norway , Denmark , the Netherlands , and Turkey are part of the active development program ; several additional countries have ordered , or are considering ordering , the F-35 .
The program is the most expensive military weapons system in history , and has been much criticized inside and outside government , in the U.S. and in allied countries .
Critics argue that the plane is `` plagued with design flaws , '' with many blaming the procurement process in which Lockheed was allowed `` to design , test , and produce the F-35 all at the same time , instead of ... -LSB- identifying and fixing -RSB- defects before firing up its production line . ''
By 2014 , the program was `` $ 163 billion over budget -LSB- and -RSB- seven years behind schedule . ''
Critics also contend that the program 's high sunk costs and political momentum make it `` too big to kill . ''