Lois Lane is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics , commonly in association with the superhero Superman .
Created by writer Jerry Siegel and artist Joe Shuster , she first appeared in Action Comics # 1 -LRB- June 1938 -RRB- .
Lois is a reporter for the Metropolis newspaper , the Daily Planet , an award-winning journalist and the primary love interest of Superman .
Her physical appearance was originally based on Joanne Carter , a model hired by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster , and Siegel 's future wife .
For her character , Siegel was inspired by actress Glenda Farrell , the movie star who portrayed Torchy Blane -- a gutsy , beautiful headline-hunting reporter , starring in a series of 1930s films .
Siegel took her name from actress Lola Lane .
She was also influenced by the real-life journalist Nellie Bly .
Depictions of the character have varied spanning the comics and other media adaptations .
The original Golden Age version of Lois Lane , as well as versions of her from the 1970s onwards , portrays Lois as a tough-as-nails journalist and intellectually equal to Superman .
During the Silver Age of Comics , she was the star of Superman 's Girl Friend , Lois Lane , a comic book series that had a light and humorous tone .
Beginning in 2015 , she stars as the protagonist in the young adult novel series , Lois Lane , by writer Gwenda Bond .
Lois is among the best-known female comic book characters .
She has appeared in various Superman media adaptations .
Actress Noel Neill first portrayed Lois Lane in the 1940s Superman film series and late reprise her role in the 1950s television series Adventures of Superman .
Margot Kidder played the character in four Superman films in the 1970s and '80s .
Teri Hatcher portrayed her in the 1990s television series Lois & Clark : The New Adventures of Superman and Erica Durance in the ' 00s series , Smallville .
In the 2006 film Superman Returns , she was played by Kate Bosworth .
The character was most recently portrayed by actress Amy Adams in the films Man of Steel -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice -LRB- 2016 -RRB- .