Lorazepam , sold under the brand name Ativan among others , is a benzodiazepine medication .
It is used to treat anxiety disorders , trouble sleeping , active seizures including status epilepticus , alcohol withdrawal , and chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting , as well as for surgery to interfere with memory formation and to sedate those who are being mechanically ventilated .
While it can be used for severe agitation , midazolam is usually preferred .
It is also used , along with other treatments , for acute coronary syndrome due to cocaine use .
It can be given by mouth or as an injection into a muscle or vein .
When given by injection onset of effects is between one and thirty minutes and effects last for up to a day .
Common side effects include weakness , sleepiness , low blood pressure , and a decreased effort to breathe .
When given intravenously the person should be closely monitored .
Among those who are depressed there may be an increased risk of suicide .
With long-term use larger doses may be required for the same effect .
Physical dependence and psychological dependence may also occur .
If stopped suddenly after long-term use , benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome may occur .
Older people more often develop adverse effects .
In this age group lorazepam is associated with falls and hip fractures .
Due to these concerns , lorazepam use is generally only recommended for up to two to four weeks .
Lorazepam was initially patented in 1963 and went on sale in the United States in 1977 .
It is on the World Health Organization 's List of Essential Medicines , the most effective and safe medicines needed in a health system .
It is available as a generic medication .
The wholesale cost in the developing world of a typical dose by mouth is between US$ 0.02 and US$ 0.16 as of 2014 .
In the United States as of 2015 a typical month supply is less than US$ 25 .
In the United States in 2011 , 28 million prescriptions for lorazepam were filled making it the second most prescribed benzodiazepine after alprazolam .