Lost is an American television drama series that originally aired on the American Broadcasting Company -LRB- ABC -RRB- from September 22 , 2004 , to May 23 , 2010 , over six seasons , comprising a total of 121 episodes .
Lost is a drama series containing elements of science fiction and the supernatural .
It follows the survivors of the crash of a commercial passenger jet , flying between Sydney and Los Angeles , on a mysterious tropical island somewhere in the South Pacific Ocean .
The story is told in a heavily serialized manner .
Episodes typically feature a primary storyline set on the island , augmented by flashback or flashforward sequences which provide additional insight into the involved character -LRB- s -RRB- .
Lost was created by Jeffrey Lieber , J. J. Abrams and Damon Lindelof , who share story-writing credits for the pilot episode , which Abrams directed .
Throughout the show 's run , Lindelof and Carlton Cuse served as showrunners and head writers , working together with a large number of other executive producers and writers .
Due to its large ensemble cast and the cost of filming primarily on location in Oahu , Hawaii , the series was one of the most expensive on television , with the pilot alone costing over $ 14 million .
The fictional universe and mythology of Lost are expanded upon by a number of related media , most importantly , a series of short mini-episodes called Missing Pieces , and a 12-minute epilogue titled `` The New Man in Charge '' .
Having achieved both wide acclaim and commercial success throughout its original run , Lost has been consistently ranked by critics as one of the greatest television dramas of all time .
The first season garnered an estimated average of 16 million viewers per episode on ABC .
During its sixth and final season , the show averaged over 11 million U.S. viewers per episode .
Lost was the recipient of hundreds of industry award nominations throughout its run and won numerous of these awards , including the Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series in 2005 , Best American Import at the British Academy Television Awards in 2005 , the Golden Globe Award for Best Drama in 2006 , and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Ensemble in a Drama Series .
Users of IMDb.com Pro gave Lost the highest average ranking for any television series during the first ten years -LRB- 2002 -- 2012 -RRB- of that website 's operation .