`` Love the Way You Lie '' is a song recorded by the American rapper Eminem , featuring the Barbadian singer Rihanna , from Eminem 's seventh studio album Recovery -LRB- 2010 -RRB- .
The singer and songwriter Skylar Grey wrote and recorded a demo of the song alongside the producer Alex da Kid when she felt she was in an abusive romantic relationship with the music industry .
Eminem wrote the verses and chose Rihanna to sing the chorus , resulting in a collaboration influenced by their past experiences in difficult relationships .
Recording sessions were held in Ferndale , Michigan , and Dublin , Ireland .
Backed by guitar , piano and violin , the track is a midtempo hip hop ballad with a pop refrain , sung by Rihanna , and describes two lovers who refuse to separate despite being in a dangerous love -- hate relationship .
Interscope Records released the song in August 2010 as the second single from Recovery .
Critics praised its melody but were divided on thematic aspects such as poignancy and accuracy .
Eminem promoted the single with performances at the 2010 Electronic Entertainment Expo , the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards and festivals .
The music video , directed by Joseph Kahn , stars Dominic Monaghan and Megan Fox in a violent relationship and shows Eminem and Rihanna in front of a burning house .
The clip had a mixed reception due to scenes of domestic violence .
Reporters suggested that the song and its accompanying video were influenced by Eminem 's and Rihanna 's relationships with their respective ex-lovers Kimberly Scott and Chris Brown .
Critics listed `` Love the Way You Lie '' among the best tracks of 2010 and of Eminem 's career .
The song won many awards and received five Grammy nominations .
It is Eminem 's best-selling single and ranked number one on several record charts , including the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 for seven weeks .
The single sold six million copies in the US and was the best-selling song of 2010 in the United Kingdom .
Musical acts such as Cher Lloyd and The Band Perry have performed cover versions .
Rihanna has said that the theme of domestic violence , a topic on which she claims many people do not have insight , is what makes the song effective .
She later recorded `` Love the Way You Lie -LRB- Part II -RRB- '' , narrated mostly from her perspective .