Lyme disease , also known as Lyme borreliosis , is an infectious disease caused by bacteria of the Borrelia type .
The most common sign of infection is an expanding area of redness on the skin , known as erythema migrans , that begins at the site of a tick bite about a week after it has occurred .
The rash is typically neither itchy nor painful .
Approximately 25 -- 50 % of infected people do not develop a rash .
Other early symptoms may include fever , headache and feeling tired .
If untreated , symptoms may include loss of the ability to move one or both sides of the face , joint pains , severe headaches with neck stiffness , or heart palpitations , among others .
Months to years later , repeated episodes of joint pain and swelling may occur .
Occasionally , people develop shooting pains or tingling in their arms and legs .
Despite appropriate treatment , about 10 to 20 % of people develop joint pains , memory problems , and feel tired for at least six months .
Lyme disease is transmitted to humans by the bite of infected ticks of the Ixodes genus .
Usually , the tick must be attached for 36 to 48 hours before the bacteria can spread .
In North America , Borrelia burgdorferi and Borrelia mayonii are the cause .
In Europe and Asia , the bacteria Borrelia afzelii and Borrelia garinii are also causes of the disease .
The disease does not appear to be transmissible between people , by other animals , or through food .
Diagnosis is based upon a combination of symptoms , history of tick exposure , and possibly testing for specific antibodies in the blood .
Blood tests are often negative in the early stages of the disease .
Testing of individual ticks is not typically useful .
Prevention includes efforts to prevent tick bites such as by wearing long pants and using DEET .
Using pesticides to reduce tick numbers may also be effective .
Ticks can be removed using tweezers .
If the removed tick was full of blood , a single dose of doxycycline may be used to prevent development of infection , but is not generally recommended since development of infection is rare .
If an infection develops , a number of antibiotics are effective , including doxycycline , amoxicillin , and cefuroxime .
Treatment is usually for two or three weeks .
Some people develop a fever and muscle and joint pains from treatment which may last for one or two days .
In those who develop persistent symptoms , long-term antibiotic therapy has not been found to be useful .
Lyme disease is the most common disease spread by ticks in the Northern Hemisphere .
It is estimated to affect 300,000 people a year in the United States and 65,000 people a year in Europe .
Infections are most common in the spring and early summer .
Lyme disease was diagnosed as a separate condition for the first time in 1975 in Old Lyme , Connecticut .
It was originally mistaken for juvenile rheumatoid arthritis .
The bacterium involved was first described in 1981 by Willy Burgdorfer .
Chronic symptoms are well described and are known as post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome , although it is often called chronic Lyme disease .
Some healthcare providers claim that it is due to ongoing infection ; however , this is not believed to be true .
A previous vaccine is no longer available .
Research is ongoing to develop new vaccines .