Lymphoma is a group of blood cell tumors that develop from lymphocytes -LRB- a type of white blood cell -RRB- .
The name often refers to just the cancerous ones rather than all such tumors .
Signs and symptoms may include enlarged lymph nodes , fever , drenching sweats , unintended weight loss , itching , and constantly feeling tired .
The enlarged lymph nodes are usually painless .
The sweats are most common at night .
There are dozens of subtypes of lymphomas .
The two main categories of lymphomas are Hodgkin 's lymphomas -LRB- HL -RRB- and the non-Hodgkin lymphomas -LRB- NHL -RRB- .
The World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- includes two other categories as types of lymphoma : multiple myeloma and immunoproliferative diseases .
About 90 % of lymphomas are non-Hodgkin lymphomas .
Lymphomas and leukemias are a part of the broader group of tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues .
Risk factors for Hodgkin lymphoma include infection with Epstein -- Barr virus and a history of the disease in the family .
Risk factors for common types of non-Hodgkin lymphomas include autoimmune diseases , HIV/AIDS , infection with human T-lymphotropic virus , immunosuppressant medications , and some pesticides .
Eating large amounts of red meat and tobacco smoking may also increase the risk .
Diagnosis , if enlarged lymph nodes are present , is usually by lymph node biopsy .
Blood , urine , and bone marrow testing may also be useful in the diagnosis .
Medical imaging may then be done to determine if and where the cancer has spread .
Lymphoma most often spreads to the lungs , liver , and/or brain .
Treatment may involve one or more of the following : chemotherapy , radiation therapy , targeted therapy , and surgery .
In some non-Hodgkin lymphomas , an increased amount of protein produced by the lymphoma cells causes the blood to become so thick that plasmapheresis is performed to remove the protein .
Watchful waiting may be appropriate for certain types .
The outcome depends on the subtype with some being curable and treatment prolonging survival in most .
The five-year survival rate in the United States for all Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes is 85 % , while that for non-Hodgkin lymphomas is 69 % .
Worldwide , lymphomas developed in 566,000 people in 2012 and caused 305,000 deaths .
They make up 3 -- 4 % of all cancers , making them as a group the seventh-most common form .
In children , they are the third-most common cancer .
They occur more often in the developed world than the developing world .