Mad Max : Fury Road is a 2015 action film co-written , co-produced and directed by George Miller .
Miller collaborated with Brendan McCarthy and Nico Lathouris on the screenplay .
The fourth in the Mad Max franchise , it is an Australian and American venture produced by Kennedy Miller Mitchell , RatPac-Dune Entertainment and Village Roadshow Pictures .
The film is set in a future desert wasteland where gasoline and water are scarce commodities .
It follows Max Rockatansky -LRB- Tom Hardy -RRB- , who joins forces with Imperator Furiosa -LRB- Charlize Theron -RRB- to flee from cult leader Immortan Joe -LRB- Hugh Keays-Byrne -RRB- and his army in an armoured tanker truck , which leads to a lengthy road battle .
The film also features Nicholas Hoult , Rosie Huntington-Whiteley , Riley Keough , Zoë Kravitz , Abbey Lee , and Courtney Eaton .
Fury Road was in development hell for many years , with pre-production starting as early as 1997 .
Attempts were made to shoot the film in 2001 and 2003 , but were delayed due to the September 11 attacks and the Iraq War .
In 2007 , after focusing on Happy Feet , Miller decided to pursue producing the film again .
He briefly considered producing it as a computer-animated film but abandoned it in favor of live-action .
In 2009 , Miller announced that filming would begin in early 2011 .
Hardy was cast as Max in June 2010 , with production planned to begin that November .
Principal photography was delayed several more times before beginning in July 2012 .
The film wrapped in December 2012 , although additional film footage was shot in November 2013 .
The film had its world premiere on 7 May 2015 at the TCL Chinese Theatre .
It began a worldwide theatrical release on 14 May 2015 , including an out-of-competition screening at the 68th Cannes Film Festival , in 2D , 3D , IMAX 3D and 4DX .
It has grossed over $ 378 million worldwide , making it the highest-grossing film in the Mad Max franchise .
The film was ranked by many critics as the best film of 2015 , and is considered one of the greatest action films ever made ; acclaim went to its screenplay , action sequences , and ensemble cast .
Fury Road won multiple critical and guild awards , and received ten Academy Award nominations including Best Picture and Best Director for George Miller .
It won six : Costume Design , Production Design , Makeup and Hairstyling , Film Editing , Sound Editing and Sound Mixing .