Malta -LRB- -LSB- ˈmɒltə -RSB- -LSB- ˈmɐltɐ -RSB- -RRB- , officially known as the Republic of Malta -LRB- Repubblika ta ' Malta -RRB- , is a Southern European island country consisting of an archipelago in the Mediterranean Sea .
It lies 80 km south of Italy , 284 km east of Tunisia , and 333 km north of Libya .
The country covers just over 316 km2 , with a population of just under 450,000 , making it one of the world 's smallest and most densely populated countries .
The capital of Malta is Valletta , which at 0.8 km2 , is the smallest national capital in the European Union by area .
Malta has one national language , which is Maltese , and English as an official language .
Malta 's location in the middle of the Mediterranean has historically given it great strategic importance as a naval base , and a succession of powers , including the Phoenicians , Carthaginians , Greeks , Romans , Byzantines , Moors , Normans , Sicilians , Spanish , Knights of St. John , French and British , have ruled the islands .
King George VI of the United Kingdom awarded the George Cross to Malta in 1942 for the country 's bravery in the Second World War .
The George Cross continues to appear on Malta 's national flag .
Under the Malta Independence Act , passed by the British Parliament in 1964 , Malta gained independence from the United Kingdom as an independent sovereign Commonwealth realm , officially known from 1964 to 1974 as the State of Malta , with Elizabeth II as its head of state .
The country became a republic in 1974 , and although no longer a Commonwealth realm , remains a member state of the Commonwealth of Nations .
Malta was admitted to the United Nations in 1964 and to the European Union in 2004 ; in 2008 , it became part of the Eurozone .
Malta has a long Christian legacy and its Archdiocese of Malta is claimed to be an apostolic see because , according to Acts of the Apostles , St Paul was shipwrecked on `` Melita '' , now widely taken to be Malta .
Catholicism is the official religion in Malta .
Malta is a popular tourist destination with its warm climate , numerous recreational areas , and architectural and historical monuments , including three UNESCO World Heritage Sites : Ħal Saflieni Hypogeum , Valletta , and seven Megalithic Temples , which are some of the oldest free-standing structures in the world .