Manmohan Singh -LRB- -LSB- mənˈmoːɦən ˈsɪ́ŋɡ -RSB- ; born 26 September 1932 -RRB- is an Indian economist and politician who served as the Prime Minister of India from 2004 to 2014 .
The first Sikh in office , Singh was also the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru to be re-elected after completing a full five-year term .
Born in Gah -LRB- now in Punjab , Pakistan -RRB- , Singh 's family migrated to India during its partition in 1947 .
After obtaining his doctorate in economics from Oxford , Singh worked for the United Nations during 1966 -- 69 .
He subsequently began his bureaucratic career when Lalit Narayan Mishra hired him as an advisor in the Ministry of Foreign Trade .
Over the 70s and 80s , Singh held several key posts in the Government of India , such as Chief Economic Advisor -LRB- 1972 -- 76 -RRB- , Reserve Bank governor -LRB- 1982 -- 85 -RRB- and Planning Commission head -LRB- 1985 -- 87 -RRB- .
In 1991 , as India faced a severe economic crisis , newly elected Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao surprisingly inducted the apolitical Singh into his cabinet as Finance Minister .
Over the next few years , despite strong opposition , he as a Finance Minister carried out several structural reforms that liberalised India 's economy .
Although these measures proved successful in averting the crisis , and enhanced Singh 's reputation globally as a leading reform-minded economist , the incumbent Congress party fared poorly in the 1996 general election .
Subsequently , Singh served as Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha -LRB- the upper house of India 's Parliament -RRB- during the Atal Bihari Vajpayee government of 1998 -- 2004 .
In 2004 , when the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance -LRB- UPA -RRB- came to power , its chairperson Sonia Gandhi unexpectedly relinquished the premiership to Manmohan Singh .
Singh 's first ministry executed several key legislations and projects , including the Rural Health Mission , Unique Identification Authority , Rural Employment Guarantee scheme and Right to Information Act .
In 2008 , opposition to a historic civil nuclear agreement with the United States nearly caused Singh 's government to fall after Left Front parties withdrew their support .
Although India 's economy grew rapidly under UPA I , its security was threatened by several terrorist incidents -LRB- including the 2008 Mumbai attacks -RRB- and the continuing Maoist insurgency .
The 2009 general election saw the UPA return with an increased mandate , with Singh retaining the office of Prime Minister .
Over the next few years , Singh 's second ministry government faced a number of corruption charges -- over the organisation of the Commonwealth Games , the 2G-spectrum allocation and the allocation of coal blocks .
After his term ended in 2014 he opted out from the race to the office of the Prime Minister of India during 2014 Indian general election .
Singh was never a member of the Lok Sabha but continues to serve as a member of the Indian Parliament , representing the state of Assam in the Rajya Sabha for the fifth consecutive term since 1991 .