Margaret Hilda Thatcher , Baroness Thatcher , -LRB- ; 13 October 1925 -- 8 April 2013 -RRB- was a British stateswoman , who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1979 to 1990 and as Leader of the Conservative Party from 1975 to 1990 .
She was the longest-serving British prime minister of the 20th century , and the first woman to have held the office .
A Soviet journalist dubbed her The Iron Lady , a nickname that became associated with her uncompromising politics and leadership style .
As Prime Minister , she implemented policies that have come to be known as Thatcherism .
A research chemist before becoming a barrister , Thatcher was elected Member of Parliament for Finchley in 1959 .
Edward Heath appointed her Secretary of State for Education and Science in his 1970 government .
In 1975 , Thatcher defeated Heath in the Conservative Party leadership election to become Leader of the Opposition and became the first woman to lead a major political party in the United Kingdom .
She became Prime Minister after winning the 1979 general election .
On moving into , Thatcher introduced a series of political and economic initiatives intended to reverse high unemployment and Britain 's struggles in the wake of the Winter of Discontent and an ongoing recession .
Her political philosophy and economic policies emphasised deregulation -LRB- particularly of the financial sector -RRB- , flexible labour markets , the privatisation of state-owned companies , and reducing the power and influence of trade unions .
Thatcher 's popularity during her first years in office waned amid recession and high unemployment , until victory in the 1982 Falklands War and the recovering economy brought a resurgence of support , resulting in her decisive re-election in 1983 .
She narrowly escaped an assassination attempt in 1984 .
Thatcher was re-elected for a third term in 1987 .
During this period her support for a Community Charge -LRB- referred to as the `` poll tax '' -RRB- was widely unpopular , and her views on the European Community were not shared by others in her Cabinet .
She resigned as Prime Minister and party leader in November 1990 , after Michael Heseltine launched a challenge to her leadership .
After retiring from the Commons in 1992 , she was given a life peerage as Baroness Thatcher -LRB- of Kesteven in the County of Lincolnshire -RRB- which entitled her to sit in the House of Lords .
After a series of small strokes in 2002 , she was advised to withdraw from public speaking .
Despite this , she managed to pre-record a eulogy to Ronald Reagan prior to his death , which was broadcast at his funeral in 2004 .
In 2013 , she died of another stroke in London , at the age of 87 .
Always a controversial figure , she has been lauded as one of the greatest and most influential politicians in British history , even as arguments over Thatcherism persist .