Maria Theresa Walburga Amalia Christina -LRB- Maria Theresia -LSB- maˈʁiːa teˈʁeːzi̯a -RSB- 13 May 1717 -- 29 November 1780 -RRB- was the only female ruler of the Habsburg dominions and the last of the House of Habsburg .
She was the sovereign of Austria , Hungary , Croatia , Bohemia , Transylvania , Mantua , Milan , Lodomeria and Galicia , the Austrian Netherlands and Parma .
By marriage , she was Duchess of Lorraine , Grand Duchess of Tuscany and Holy Roman Empress .
She started her 40-year reign when her father , Emperor Charles VI , died in October 1740 .
Charles VI paved the way for her accession with the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 and spent his entire reign securing it .
Upon the death of her father , Saxony , Prussia , Bavaria , and France all repudiated the sanction they had recognised during his lifetime .
Frederick II of Prussia -LRB- who became Maria Theresa 's greatest enemy for most of her reign -RRB- promptly invaded and took the affluent Habsburg province of Silesia in the nine-year conflict known as the War of the Austrian Succession .
Over the course of the war , despite the loss of Silesia and a few minor territories in Italy , Maria Theresa successfully defended her rule over most of the Habsburg empire .
Maria Theresa later unsuccessfully tried to reconquer Silesia during the Seven Years ' War .
Maria Theresa and her husband , Francis I , Holy Roman Emperor , had eleven daughters , including the Queen of France and Navarre , the Queen of Naples and Sicily , the Duchess of Parma , and five sons , including two Holy Roman Emperors , Joseph II and Leopold II .
Of the sixteen children ten survived to adulthood .
Though she was expected to cede power to Francis and Joseph , both of whom were officially her co-rulers in Austria and Bohemia , Maria Theresa was the absolute sovereign who ruled with the counsel of her advisers .
She criticised and disapproved of many of Joseph 's actions .
Maria Theresa understood the importance of her public persona and was able to simultaneously evoke both esteem and affection from her subjects .
Maria Theresa promulgated financial and educational reforms , with the assistance of Count Friedrich Wilhelm von Haugwitz and Gerard van Swieten , promoted commerce and the development of agriculture , and reorganised Austria 's ramshackle military , all of which strengthened Austria 's international standing .
However , she refused to allow religious pluralism and advocated for the state church and contemporary adversary travelers criticized her regime as bigoted and superstitious .
As a young monarch who fought two dynastic wars , she believed that her cause should be the cause of her subjects , but in her later years she would believe that their cause must be hers .