Marilyn Monroe -LRB- born Norma Jeane Mortenson ; June 1 , 1926 -- August 5 , 1962 -RRB- was an American actress and model .
Famous for playing comic `` dumb blonde '' characters , she became one of the most popular sex symbols of the 1950s , emblematic of the era 's attitudes towards sexuality .
Although she was a top-billed actress for only a decade , her films grossed $ 200 million by the time of her unexpected death in 1962 .
She continues to be considered a major popular culture icon .
Born and raised in Los Angeles , Monroe spent most of her childhood in foster homes and an orphanage and married at the age of sixteen .
While working in a factory in 1944 as part of the war effort , she was introduced to a photographer from the First Motion Picture Unit and began a successful pin-up modeling career .
The work led to short-lived film contracts with Twentieth Century-Fox -LRB- 1946 -- 1947 -RRB- and Columbia Pictures -LRB- 1948 -RRB- .
After a series of minor film roles , she signed a new contract with Fox in 1951 .
Over the next two years , she became a popular actress with roles in several comedies , including As Young as You Feel and Monkey Business , and in the dramas Clash by Night and Do n't Bother to Knock .
Monroe faced a scandal when it was revealed that she had posed for nude photos before becoming a star , but rather than damaging her career , the story resulted in increased interest in her films .
By 1953 , Monroe was one of the most marketable Hollywood stars , with leading roles in three films : the noir Niagara , which focused on her sex appeal , and the comedies Gentlemen Prefer Blondes and How to Marry a Millionaire , which established her star image as a `` dumb blonde '' .
Although she played a significant role in the creation and management of her public image throughout her career , she was disappointed at being typecast and underpaid by the studio .
She was briefly suspended in early 1954 for refusing a film project , but returned to star in one of the biggest box office successes of her career , The Seven Year Itch -LRB- 1955 -RRB- .
When the studio was still reluctant to change her contract , Monroe founded a film production company in late 1954 ; she named it Marilyn Monroe Productions -LRB- MMP -RRB- .
She dedicated 1955 to building her company and began studying method acting at the Actors Studio .
In late 1955 , Fox awarded her a new contract , which gave her more control and a larger salary .
After a critically acclaimed performance in Bus Stop -LRB- 1956 -RRB- and acting in the first independent production of MMP , The Prince and the Showgirl -LRB- 1957 -RRB- , she won a Golden Globe for Best Actress for Some Like It Hot -LRB- 1959 -RRB- .
Her last completed film was the drama The Misfits -LRB- 1961 -RRB- .
Monroe 's troubled private life received much attention .
She struggled with substance abuse , depression , and anxiety .
She had two highly publicized marriages , to retired baseball star Joe DiMaggio and playwright Arthur Miller , both of which ended in divorce .
On August 5 , 1962 , she died at age 36 from an overdose of barbiturates at her home in Los Angeles .
Although Monroe 's death was ruled a probable suicide , several conspiracy theories have been proposed in the decades following her death .