Marie Skłodowska Curie -LRB- -LSB- ˈkjʊri , _ kjʊˈriː -RSB- -LSB- kyʁi -RSB- ; -LSB- kʲiˈri -RSB- ; 7 November 18674 July 1934 -RRB- , born Maria Salomea Skłodowska -LRB- -LSB- ˈmarja salɔˈmɛa skwɔˈdɔfska -RSB- -RRB- , was a Polish and naturalized-French physicist and chemist who conducted pioneering research on radioactivity .
She was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize , the first person and only woman to win twice , the only person to win a Nobel Prize in two different sciences , and was part of the Curie family legacy of five Nobel Prizes .
She was also the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris , and in 1995 became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Panthéon in Paris .
She was born in Warsaw , in what was then the Kingdom of Poland , part of the Russian Empire .
She studied at Warsaw 's clandestine Floating University and began her practical scientific training in Warsaw .
In 1891 , aged 24 , she followed her older sister Bronisława to study in Paris , where she earned her higher degrees and conducted her subsequent scientific work .
She shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with her husband Pierre Curie and with physicist Henri Becquerel .
She won the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry .
Her achievements included the development of the theory of radioactivity -LRB- a term that she coined -RRB- , techniques for isolating radioactive isotopes , and the discovery of two elements , polonium and radium .
Under her direction , the world 's first studies were conducted into the treatment of neoplasms , using radioactive isotopes .
She founded the Curie Institutes in Paris and in Warsaw , which remain major centres of medical research today .
During World War I , she developed mobile radiography units to provide X-ray services to field hospitals .
While a French citizen , Marie Skłodowska Curie -LRB- she used both surnames -RRB- never lost her sense of Polish identity .
She taught her daughters the Polish language and took them on visits to Poland .
She named the first chemical element that she discoveredpolonium , which she isolated in 1898after her native country .
Curie died in 1934 , aged 66 , at a sanatorium in Sancellemoz -LRB- Haute-Savoie -RRB- , France , due to aplastic anemia brought on by exposure to radiation while carrying test tubes of radium in her pockets during research , and in the course of her work at field hospitals during World War I.