Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun and the second-smallest planet in the Solar System , after Mercury .
Named after the Roman god of war , it is often referred to as the `` Red Planet '' because the iron oxide prevalent on its surface gives it a reddish appearance .
Mars is a terrestrial planet with a thin atmosphere , having surface features reminiscent both of the impact craters of the Moon and the valleys , deserts , and polar ice caps of Earth .
The rotational period and seasonal cycles of Mars are likewise similar to those of Earth , as is the tilt that produces the seasons .
Mars is the site of Olympus Mons , the largest volcano and second-highest known mountain in the Solar System , and of Valles Marineris , one of the largest canyons in the Solar System .
The smooth Borealis basin in the northern hemisphere covers 40 % of the planet and may be a giant impact feature .
Mars has two moons , Phobos and Deimos , which are small and irregularly shaped .
These may be captured asteroids , similar to 5261 Eureka , a Mars trojan .
There are ongoing investigations assessing the past habitability potential of Mars , as well as the possibility of extant life .
Future astrobiology missions are planned , including the Mars 2020 and ExoMars rovers .
Liquid water can not exist on the surface of Mars due to low atmospheric pressure , which is about that of the Earth 's , except at the lowest elevations for short periods .
The two polar ice caps appear to be made largely of water .
The volume of water ice in the south polar ice cap , if melted , would be sufficient to cover the entire planetary surface to a depth of 11 m .
In November 2016 , NASA reported finding a large amount of underground ice in the Utopia Planitia region of Mars .
The volume of water detected has been estimated to be equivalent to the volume of water in Lake Superior .
Mars can easily be seen from Earth with the naked eye , as can its reddish coloring .
Its apparent magnitude reaches − 2.91 , which is surpassed only by Jupiter , Venus , the Moon , and the Sun .
Optical ground-based telescopes are typically limited to resolving features about 300 km across when Earth and Mars are closest because of Earth 's atmosphere .