Martin Van Buren -LRB- Maarten van Buren ; December 5 , 1782 -- July 24 , 1862 -RRB- was an American politician who served as the eighth President of the United States -LRB- 1837 -- 41 -RRB- .
A member of the Democratic Party , he served in a number of other senior roles , including eighth Vice President -LRB- 1833 -- 37 -RRB- and tenth Secretary of State -LRB- 1829 -- 31 -RRB- , both under Andrew Jackson .
Van Buren won the presidency by promising to continue Jackson 's policies .
Shortly after taking office , the Panic of 1837 struck the nation , and his inability to deal effectively with the economic crisis , combined with the growing political strength of the opposition Whig Party , led to his defeat in the 1840 presidential election .
During his half-century of public service , he built , perfected , and defended a new system of political parties at first the state and then the federal level .
In New York he reorganized the Democratic-Republican Party and established the Albany Regency to keep it in power .
He then moved on Washington where he did more than anyone to construct the modern Democratic Party which dominated American politics down to the American Civil War .
A delegate to a political convention at age 18 , he quickly moved from local to state politics , gaining fame both as a political organizer and an accomplished lawyer .
Elected to the Senate by the New York State Legislature in 1821 , Van Buren supported William H. Crawford for president in the 1824 election , but by 1828 had come to support Jackson .
Van Buren was a major supporter and organizer for Jackson in the 1828 election , and ran for Governor of New York in the hope of using his personal popularity to boost Jackson 's campaign .
Jackson and Van Buren were elected , and after serving as governor for two months , Van Buren resigned to become Jackson 's Secretary of State .
During Jackson 's eight years as president , Van Buren was a key advisor , and built the organizational structure for the coalescing Democratic Party , particularly in New York .
In 1831 , following his resignation as Secretary of State , which aided Jackson in resolving the Petticoat affair , Jackson gave Van Buren a recess appointment as American minister to Britain .
Van Buren 's nomination was rejected by the Senate , cutting short his service in London , but he was elected vice president in the 1832 election .
Van Buren faced little opposition for the presidential nomination at the 1835 Democratic National Convention , and he defeated several Whig opponents in the 1836 presidential election .
He was the first president to be born a United States citizen .
Of Dutch ancestry , he is the only president who spoke English as a second language , and was the first not to have a university degree or a military commission .
As president , Van Buren was blamed for the depression of 1837 ; hostile newspapers called him `` Martin Van Ruin '' .
He attempted to cure the economic problems by keeping control of federal funds in an independent treasury , rather than in state banks , but Congress would not approve of this until 1840 .
In foreign affairs , he denied the application of Texas for admission to the Union , unwilling to upset the balance of free and slave states in the Missouri Compromise , and hoping to avoid war with Mexico over Texas annexation .
Additionally , relations with Britain and its colonies in Canada proved to be strained from the bloodless Aroostook War and the Caroline Affair .
In the 1840 election , Van Buren was voted out of office , losing to Whig candidate William Henry Harrison .
Van Buren was the leading candidate for the Democratic nomination in 1844 , but lost to James K. Polk , who went on to win the election .
In the 1848 election Van Buren ran unsuccessfully as the candidate of the anti-slavery Free Soil Party .
He returned to the Democratic fold to endorse Franklin Pierce -LRB- 1852 -RRB- , James Buchanan -LRB- 1856 -RRB- , and Stephen A. Douglas -LRB- 1860 -RRB- for the presidency .
However , his increasingly abolitionist views and support for the Union led him to support Abraham Lincoln 's policies after the start of the American Civil War .
Van Buren 's health began to fail in 1861 , and he died in July 1862 at age 79 .