Matthew William `` Matt '' Sorum -LRB- born November 19 , 1960 -RRB- is an American drummer and percussionist .
He is best known as both a former member of the hard rock band Guns N ' Roses , with whom he recorded three studio albums , and as a member of the supergroup Velvet Revolver .
Sorum is currently a member of the touring project , Kings of Chaos , and is a former member of both The Cult and Y Kant Tori Read .
Sorum was also a member of Guns N ' Roses side-projects , Slash 's Snakepit and Neurotic Outsiders , and released a solo album , Hollywood Zen , in 2004 .
After performing on synthpop band Y Kant Tori Read 's sole album , Sorum joined The Cult in 1989 to tour in support of their fourth studio album , Sonic Temple -LRB- 1989 -RRB- .
During the tour , Sorum was spotted by Guns N ' Roses guitarist Slash and subsequently replaced their drummer Steven Adler in 1990 .
Remaining in the band for seven years , Sorum recorded the albums , Use Your Illusion I -LRB- 1991 -RRB- , Use Your Illusion II -LRB- 1991 -RRB- , and `` The Spaghetti Incident ? ''
-LRB- 1993 -RRB- , before departing in 1997 following an argument with Axl Rose .
In 2001 , Sorum rejoined The Cult to perform on their reunion album , Beyond Good and Evil -LRB- 2001 -RRB- , and its subsequent tour and subsequently co-founded the hard rock supergroup Velvet Revolver , alongside former Guns N ' Roses bandmates , Slash and Duff McKagan .
The band , which also included guitarist Dave Kushner and Stone Temple Pilots frontman Scott Weiland , released two successful studio albums , Contraband -LRB- 2004 -RRB- and Libertad -LRB- 2007 -RRB- , before entering an extended hiatus following Weiland 's departure .
Sorum has been a permanent member of hard rock cover band Camp Freddy since 2003 , alongside Jane 's Addiction members Dave Navarro and Chris Chaney , and assisted in hosting its radio show and podcast on Indie 103.1 .
In 2012 , Sorum founded a touring project , entitled Kings of Chaos , featuring members of Guns N ' Roses , Deep Purple , Def Leppard , Aerosmith , ZZ Top , Cheap Trick and Slipknot .
In 2012 , Sorum was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Guns N ' Roses .