Matthias Corvinus , also called Matthias I -LRB- Hunyadi Mátyás , Matija Korvin , Matia Corvin , Matej Korvín , Matyáš Korvín 23 February 1443 -- 6 April 1490 -RRB- , was King of Hungary and Croatia from 1458 to 1490 .
After conducting several military campaigns , he was elected King of Bohemia in 1469 and adopted the title Duke of Austria in 1487 .
He was the son of John Hunyadi , Regent of Hungary , who died in 1456 .
In 1457 , Matthias was imprisoned along with his older brother , Ladislaus Hunyadi , on the orders of King Ladislaus V of Hungary .
Ladislaus Hunyadi was executed , causing a rebellion that forced King Ladislaus to flee Hungary .
After the King died unexpectedly , Matthias 's uncle Michael Szilágyi persuaded the Estates to unanimously proclaim Matthias king on 24 January 1458 .
He began his rule under his uncle 's guardianship , but he took effective control of government within two weeks .
As king , Matthias waged wars against the Czech mercenaries who dominated Upper Hungary -LRB- today parts of Slovakia and Northern Hungary -RRB- and against Frederick III , Holy Roman Emperor , who claimed Hungary for himself .
In this period , the Ottoman Empire conquered Serbia and Bosnia , terminating the zone of buffer states along the southern frontiers of the Kingdom of Hungary .
Matthias signed a peace treaty with Frederick III in 1463 , acknowledging the Emperor 's right to style himself King of Hungary .
The Emperor returned the Holy Crown of Hungary with which Matthias was crowned on 29 April 1464 .
In this year , Matthias invaded the territories that had recently been occupied by the Ottomans and seized fortresses in Bosnia .
He soon realized he could expect no substantial aid from the Christian powers and gave up his anti-Ottoman policy .
Matthias introduced new taxes and regularly collected extraordinary taxes .
These measures caused a rebellion in Transylvania in 1467 , but he subdued the rebels .
The next year , Matthias declared war on George of Poděbrady , the Hussite King of Bohemia , and conquered Moravia , Silesia , and Lausitz , but he could not occupy Bohemia proper .
The Catholic Estates proclaimed him King of Bohemia on 3 May 1469 , but the Hussite lords refused to yield to him even after the death of George of Poděbrady in 1471 .
Instead , they elected Vladislaus Jagiellon , the eldest son of Casimir IV of Poland .
A group of Hungarian prelates and lords offered the throne to Vladislaus 's younger brother Casimir , but Matthias overcame their rebellion .
Having routed the united troops of Casimir IV and Vladislaus at Breslau in Silesia -LRB- now Wrocław in Poland -RRB- in late 1474 , Matthias turned against the Ottomans , who had devastated the eastern parts of Hungary .
He sent reinforcements to Stephen the Great , Prince of Moldavia , enabling Stephen to repel a series of Ottoman invasions in the late 1470s .
In 1476 , Matthias besieged and seized Šabac , an important Ottoman border fort .
He concluded a peace treaty with Vladislaus Jagiellon in 1478 , confirming the division of the Lands of the Bohemian Crown between them .
Matthias waged a war against Emperor Frederick and occupied Lower Austria between 1482 and 1487 .
Matthias established a professional army -LRB- the Black Army of Hungary -RRB- , reformed the administration of justice , reduced the power of the barons , and promoted the careers of talented individuals chosen for their abilities rather than their social statuses .
Matthias patronized art and science ; his royal library , the Bibliotheca Corviniana , was one of the largest collections of books in Europe .
With his patronage , Hungary became the first country to embrace the Renaissance from Italy .
As Matthias the Just , the monarch who wandered among his subjects in disguise , he remains a popular hero of Hungarian folk tales .