Measles is a highly contagious infection caused by the measles virus .
Initial signs and symptoms typically include fever , often greater than 40 C , cough , runny nose , and inflamed eyes .
Two or three days after the start of symptoms , small white spots may form inside the mouth , known as Koplik 's spots .
A red , flat rash which usually starts on the face and then spreads to the rest of the body typically begins three to five days after the start of symptoms .
Symptoms usually develop 10 -- 12 days after exposure to an infected person and last 7 -- 10 days .
Complications occur in about 30 % and may include diarrhea , blindness , inflammation of the brain , and pneumonia among others .
Rubella -LRB- German measles -RRB- and roseola are different diseases .
Measles is an airborne disease which spreads easily through the coughs and sneezes of those infected .
It may also be spread through contact with saliva or nasal secretions .
Nine out of ten people who are not immune and share living space with an infected person will catch it .
People are infectious to others from four days before to four days after the start of the rash .
People usually do not get the disease more than once .
Testing for the virus in suspected cases is important for public health efforts .
The measles vaccine is effective at preventing the disease .
Vaccination has resulted in a 75 % decrease in deaths from measles between 2000 and 2013 with about 85 % of children globally being currently vaccinated .
No specific treatment is available .
Supportive care may improve outcomes .
This may include giving oral rehydration solution -LRB- slightly sweet and salty fluids -RRB- , healthy food , and medications to control the fever .
Antibiotics may be used if a secondary bacterial infection such as pneumonia occurs .
Vitamin A supplementation is also recommended in the developing world .
Measles affects about 20 million people a year , primarily in the developing areas of Africa and Asia .
It causes the most vaccine-preventable deaths of any disease .
It resulted in about 73,000 deaths in 2014 , down from 545,000 deaths in 1990 .
In 1980 , the disease was estimated to have caused 2.6 million deaths per year .
Most of those who are infected and who die are less than five years old .
The risk of death among those infected is usually 0.2 % , but may be up to 10 % in those who have malnutrition .
It is not believed to affect other animals .
Before immunization in the United States , between three and four million cases occurred each year .
As a result of widespread vaccination , the disease was eliminated from the Americas by 2016 .