Melanie Janine Brown -LRB- born 29 May 1975 -RRB- , better known as Mel B or Melanie B , is an English singer , songwriter , presenter , television personality , dancer , actress , author , and model .
Brown rose to fame as a member of the girl group the Spice Girls , in which she became known as Scary Spice .
Brown is also known for supporting girl power and earlier global tours , which grossed an estimated $ 500 -- 800 million between 1996 and 2000 .
Brown began her solo career when she released `` I Want You Back '' with Missy Elliott on Virgin Records .
The single charted at number one on the UK Singles Chart , followed by the release of her debut album , Hot -LRB- 2000 -RRB- .
The album also saw the release of two top 10 singles `` Tell Me '' and `` Feels So Good '' .
L.A. State of Mind was Brown 's second studio album , released in 2005 on the independent label Amber Café , which saw the release of one single , `` Today '' in June that year .
In mid-2012 , Brown announced a return to her solo recording career with the release of her third studio album by signing with EMI Music Australia .
The scope of the deal with EMI office includes concessions for global partnering with EMI .
The first single from the album , `` For Once in My Life '' was released in September 2013 , becoming Brown 's first record to be released after eight years .
Since 2000 , Brown has concentrated on a variety of non-singing projects .
She became the presenter of shows such as This Is My Moment , Top of the Pops , Party in the Park and The All Star Animal Awards .
In September 2007 , she became a contestant on the fifth season of the American dance competition , Dancing with the Stars ; in which she placed runner-up overall partnered with Maksim Chmerkovskiy .
Brown returned to television work becoming a judge for the Australian version of The X Factor from 2011 to 2012 , replacing Kyle Sandilands and having previously been a celebrity mentor on the show in 2010 .
In June 2012 , she was a guest judge during the Manchester auditions for the ninth series of The X Factor UK , as one of the temporary replacements for Kelly Rowland ; before the role eventually went to Nicole Scherzinger .
She later joined The X Factor UK for its eleventh series in 2014 .
During this time she became the female co-host for Dancing with the Stars Australia , in which she hosted the twelfth season alongside Daniel MacPherson .
However , Brown resigned from the show and did not return for the thirteenth season in 2013 .
In February that year , she officially signed on to become one of the four judges for the variety talent show America 's Got Talent , replacing Sharon Osbourne from the eighth season onwards .
On 1 February 2014 , she was revealed to be a coach on The Voice Kids in Australia , which aired in mid-2014 .