Michael Joseph Jackson -LRB- August 29 , 1958 -- June 25 , 2009 -RRB- was an American singer , songwriter , record producer , dancer , actor , and philanthropist .
Called the `` King of Pop '' , his contributions to music , dance , and fashion along with his publicized personal life made him a global figure in popular culture for over four decades .
The eighth child of the Jackson family , Michael made his professional debut in 1964 with his elder brothers Jackie , Tito , Jermaine , and Marlon as a member of the Jackson 5 .
He began his solo career in 1971 .
In the early 1980s , Jackson became a dominant figure in popular music .
His music videos , including those of `` Beat It '' , `` Billie Jean '' , and `` Thriller '' from his 1982 album Thriller , are credited with breaking racial barriers and transforming the medium into an art form and promotional tool .
The popularity of these videos helped bring the television channel MTV to fame .
Jackson 's 1987 album Bad spawned the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles `` I Just Ca n't Stop Loving You '' , `` Bad '' , `` The Way You Make Me Feel '' , `` Man in the Mirror '' , and `` Dirty Diana '' , becoming the first album to have five number-one singles on the Billboard Hot 100 .
He continued to innovate with videos such as `` Black or White '' and `` Scream '' throughout the 1990s , and forged a reputation as a touring solo artist .
Through stage and video performances , Jackson popularized a number of complicated dance techniques , such as the robot and the moonwalk , to which he gave the name .
His distinctive sound and style has influenced numerous artists of various music genres .
Thriller is the best-selling album of all time , with estimated sales of 65 million copies worldwide .
Jackson 's other albums , including Off the Wall -LRB- 1979 -RRB- , Bad -LRB- 1987 -RRB- , Dangerous -LRB- 1991 -RRB- , and HIStory -LRB- 1995 -RRB- , also rank among the world 's best-selling albums .
He is recognized as the Most Successful Entertainer of All Time by Guinness World Records .
Jackson is one of the few artists to have been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice , and was also inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame and the Dance Hall of Fame as the only dancer from pop and rock music .
His other achievements include multiple Guinness World Records , 13 Grammy Awards , the Grammy Legend Award , the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award , 26 American Music Awards -- more than any other artist -- including the `` Artist of the Century '' and `` Artist of the 1980s '' , 13 number-one singles in the United States during his solo career -- more than any other male artist in the Hot 100 era -- and estimated sales of over 350 million records worldwide .
Jackson won hundreds of awards , making him the most awarded recording artist in the history of popular music .
He became the first artist in history to have a top ten single in the Billboard Hot 100 in five different decades when `` Love Never Felt So Good '' reached number nine on May 21 , 2014 .
Jackson traveled the world attending events honoring his humanitarianism , and , in 2000 , the Guinness World Records recognized him for supporting 39 charities , more than any other entertainer .
Aspects of Jackson 's personal life , including his changing appearance , personal relationships , and behavior , generated controversy .
In 1993 , he was accused of child sexual abuse , but the civil case was settled out of court for an undisclosed amount and no formal charges were brought .
In 2005 , he was tried and acquitted of further child sexual abuse allegations and several other charges after the jury found him not guilty on all counts .
While preparing for his comeback concert series , This Is It , Jackson died of acute propofol and benzodiazepine intoxication on June 25 , 2009 , after suffering from cardiac arrest .
The Los Angeles County Coroner ruled his death a homicide , and his personal physician , Conrad Murray , was convicted of involuntary manslaughter .
Jackson 's death triggered a global outpouring of grief , and a live broadcast of his public memorial service was viewed around the world .
Forbes ranks Jackson the top-earning dead celebrity , with earnings of $ 825 million in 2016 , the highest yearly amount ever recorded by the publication .