Michael Schumacher -LRB- -LSB- ˈmɪçaʔɛl ˈʃuːmaxɐ -RSB- ; born 3 January 1969 -RRB- is a German retired racing driver .
He is a seven-time Formula One World Champion and is widely regarded as one of the greatest Formula One drivers of all time .
He was named Laureus World Sportsman of the Year twice .
He won two titles with Benetton in and before moving to Ferrari where he drove for eleven years .
His time with Ferrari yielded five consecutive titles between and .
Schumacher holds many of Formula One 's driver records , including most championships , race victories , fastest laps , pole positions and races won in a single season -- 13 in 2004 -LRB- the last record was equalled by fellow German Sebastian Vettel nine years later -RRB- .
In 2002 , he became the only driver in Formula One history to finish in the top three in every race of a season and then also broke the record for most consecutive podium finishes .
According to the official Formula One website , he is `` statistically the greatest driver the sport has ever seen '' .
After beginning in karting , Schumacher won the German drivers ' championships in Formula König and Formula Three before joining Mercedes in the World Sportscar Championship .
In 1991 , his Mercedes-funded race debut for the Jordan Formula One team resulted in Schumacher being signed by Benetton Formula One team as their driver for the rest of that season .
Establishing himself as a top driver , finishing third in 1992 and fourth in 1993 , Schumacher became the first German World Drivers ' Champion in 1994 by one point over Damon Hill .
In 1995 he repeated the success , this time with a greater margin .
Schumacher moved to Ferrari in 1996 .
Schumacher came close to winning the 1997 and 1998 titles , before breaking his leg at the 1999 British Grand Prix , ending another title run .
Schumacher won five consecutive drivers ' titles from 2000 to 2004 .
Schumacher retired from Formula One driving in 2006 staying with Ferrari as an advisor .
He came close to an eighth title that year , but due to technical problems in the final two races he fell short to Fernando Alonso .
Schumacher agreed to return for Ferrari part-way through 2009 , as cover for the badly injured Felipe Massa , but was prevented by a neck injury .
Schumacher returned to Formula One on a permanent basis from 2010 with the Mercedes team before retiring for a second time at the conclusion of the 2012 season .
His career was not without controversy , including being twice involved in collisions in the final race of a season that determined the outcome of the World Championship , with Damon Hill in 1994 in Adelaide , and with Jacques Villeneuve in 1997 in Jerez .
Off the track , Schumacher is an ambassador for UNESCO and a spokesman for driver safety .
He has been involved in numerous humanitarian efforts throughout his life and donated tens of millions of dollars to charity .
Schumacher and his younger brother , Ralf , are the only brothers to win races in Formula One , and they were the first brothers to finish 1st and 2nd in the same race , a feat they repeated in four subsequent races .
In December 2013 , Schumacher suffered a serious head injury in a skiing accident .
He was airlifted to a hospital and placed in a medically induced coma , having suffered a traumatic brain injury .
He was in the coma for six months from 29 December 2013 until 16 June 2014 .
He left the hospital in Grenoble for further rehabilitation at the University Hospital -LRB- CHUV -RRB- in Lausanne .
On 9 September 2014 , Schumacher was relocated to his home where he continues to receive medical treatment and rehabilitation privately .