The term `` microbiologist '' comes from the Greek mīkros meaning `` small '' βίος , and bios , meaning `` life '' - λογία , combined with - logia meaning one who studies .
A microbiologist -LRB- from Greek μῑκρος -RRB- is a biological scientist who studies microscopic life forms and processes or works in the field of microbiology .
Microbiologists investigate the growth , interactions and characteristics of microscopic organisms such as bacteria , algae , fungi , and some types of parasites and their vectors .
They contribute much to the field by trying to understand and learn about the interaction between these microbes and the environment and also among themselves and other organisms .
Most microbiologists are qualified to work in offices and/or research facilities , such as a laboratory as well as in the academia .
There , they conduct experiments that help them analyze microbes and their importance .
A microbiologist 's work is often repeated or improved in order to establish accurate research .
Most microbiologists specialize in environmental , food , agricultural , industrial or medical aspects of microbiology including : virology -LRB- the study of viruses -RRB- ; immunology -LRB- the study of mechanisms that fight infections -RRB- ; bioinformatics -LRB- the methods for storing , retrieving , organizing and analyzing biological data -RRB- and Bioremediation -LRB- using microbes as environmental mitigation strategies -RRB- .
Many microbiologists use biotechnology to advance the understanding of cell reproduction and human disease .
Some microbiologists have contributed to knowledge of pathogens and disease-causing microbes .
While others , study their interaction with the environment and their use as potential environmental pollution cleaners .
Microbiology is a specific subset of science that often overlaps with other subjects surrounding biology .
Because microbiologists specialize in the investigation of microorganisms that typically cause infection , their research commonly promotes information found in immunology , pathology , and molecular biology .
Nonetheless , the spectrum of fields a microbiologists can work on is immense .
There were 16,900 microbiologists employed in the United States in 2008 ; this number was projected to increase by over 12 percent in the next decade .