Milk is a 2008 American biographical film based on the life of gay rights activist and politician Harvey Milk , who was the first openly gay person to be elected to public office in California , as a member of the San Francisco Board of Supervisors .
Directed by Gus Van Sant and written by Dustin Lance Black , the film stars Sean Penn as Milk and Josh Brolin as Dan White , a city supervisor who assassinated Milk and Mayor George Moscone .
The film was released to much acclaim and earned numerous accolades from film critics and guilds .
Ultimately , it received eight Academy Award nominations , including Best Picture , winning two for Best Actor in a Leading Role for Penn and Best Original Screenplay for Black .
Attempts to put Milk 's life to film followed a 1984 documentary of his life and the aftermath of his assassination , titled The Times of Harvey Milk , which was loosely based upon Randy Shilts 's biography , The Mayor of Castro Street -LRB- the film won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature for 1984 , and was awarded Special Jury Prize at the first Sundance Film Festival , among other awards -RRB- .
Various scripts were considered in the early 1990s , but projects fell through for different reasons , until 2007 .
Much of Milk was filmed on Castro Street and other locations in San Francisco , including Milk 's former storefront , Castro Camera .
Milk begins on Harvey Milk 's 40th birthday -LRB- in 1970 -RRB- , when he was living in New York City and had not yet settled in San Francisco .
It chronicles his foray into city politics , and the various battles he waged in the Castro neighborhood as well as throughout the city , and political campaigns to limit the rights of gay people in 1977 and 1978 run by Anita Bryant and John Briggs .
His romantic and political relationships are also addressed , as is his tenuous affiliation with troubled Supervisor Dan White ; the film ends with White 's double homicide of Milk and Mayor George Moscone .
The film 's release was tied to the 2008 California voter referendum on gay marriage , Proposition 8 , when it made its premiere at the Castro Theatre two weeks before election day .