Gourang Chakraborty -LRB- born 16 June 1950 -RRB- , better known by his stage name Mithun Chakraborty ; informally referred to as Mithun Da , is an Indian film actor , singer , producer , writer , social worker , entrepreneur and a Rajya Sabha Member of Parliament .
He is the recipient of three National Film Awards .
He made his acting debut with the art house drama Mrigayaa -LRB- 1976 -RRB- , for which he won his first National Film Award for Best Actor .
He began his career as a junior actor and went on to establish himself as one of the biggest stars in Bollywood .
He is recognized as one of the best `` dancing-heroes '' in Bollywood with his `` Disco and Desi '' fusion-style dancing that is popular among the masses .
Chakraborty is best remembered for his role as Jimmy in the movie Disco Dancer which was a superhit in India and also in many other countries in the world , especially Russia .
In Russia , Chakraborty and Raj Kapoor are the most popular Indian actors .
Besides ` Disco Dancer ' , Chakraborty is best remembered for his performance in films like Suraksha , Saahas , Wardat , Pyar Jhukta Nahi , Dance Dance and Agneepath .
In 1991 , he won the Filmfare Best Supporting Actor award for his role as Krishnan Iyer Nariyal paniwala for the movie Agneepath .
He later won two more National Film Awards for his performances in Tahader Katha -LRB- 1992 -RRB- and Swami Vivekananda -LRB- 1998 -RRB- .
Chakraborty has appeared in more than 350 films including Bengali , Odia , Bhojpuri , Telugu and Punjabi pictures .
Chakraborty owns the Monarch Group , which has interests in the hospitality sector and educational sector .
He has also started the production house Paparatzy Productions In 1992 , he along with Dilip Kumar and Sunil Dutt , set up a trust to help needy actors called Cine & T.V Artistes Association -LRB- CINTAA -RRB- .
He was also the Chairperson of Film Studios Setting & Allied Mazdoor Union which take care the welfare of cine workers and resolve their demands and problems .
The Television show Dance India Dance where Chakraborty is the Grandmaster has already entered in Limca Book of Records and Guinness World Records Chakraborty played a crucial role of mediator between Pranab Mukherjee and Mamata Banerjee , winning the Congressman the support of the Trinamool chief in the 2012 presidential election .
A comic book named Jimmy Zhingchak has been made based on Chakraborty .