Modern American liberalism is the dominant version of liberalism in the United States .
It is characterized by social liberalism , and combines ideas of civil liberty and equality with support for social justice and a mixed economy .
The term `` modern liberalism '' in this article refers only to the United States .
In a global context , this philosophy is usually referred to as social liberalism .
The American modern liberal philosophy strongly endorses public spending on programs such as education , health care , and welfare .
Important social issues today include addressing inequality , voting rights for minorities , affirmative action , reproductive and other women 's rights , support for LGBT rights , and immigration reform .
Modern liberalism took shape during the twentieth century , with roots in Theodore Roosevelt 's New Nationalism , Woodrow Wilson 's New Freedom , Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal , Harry S. Truman 's Fair Deal , John F. Kennedy 's New Frontier , and Lyndon B. Johnson 's Great Society .
American liberals oppose conservatives on most issues , but not all .
Modern liberalism is historically related to social liberalism and progressivism , though the current relationship between liberal and progressive viewpoints is debated .
John F. Kennedy defined a liberal as follows :
Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1941 defined a liberal party as one ,
Keynesian economic theory has played an important role in the economic philosophy of modern American liberals .
Modern American liberals generally believe that national prosperity requires government management of the macroeconomy , in order to keep unemployment low , inflation in check , and growth high .
They also value institutions that defend against economic inequality .
In The Conscience of a Liberal Paul Krugman writes : `` I believe in a relatively equal society , supported by institutions that limit extremes of wealth and poverty .
I believe in democracy , civil liberties , and the rule of law .
That makes me a liberal , and I 'm proud of it . ''
Liberals often point to the widespread prosperity enjoyed under a mixed economy in the years since World War II .
They believe liberty exists when access to necessities like health care and economic opportunity are available to all , and they champion the protection of the environment .
Modern American liberalism is typically associated with the Democratic Party , as modern American conservatism is typically associated with the Republican Party .