Mogadishu -LRB- -LSB- ˌmɔːɡəˈdiːʃuː -RSB- Muqdisho -LSB- mʉqdɪʃɔ -RSB- ; مقديشو -LSB- maqadiːʃuː -RSB- -RRB- , known locally as Hamar , is the capital and most populous city of Somalia .
Located in the coastal Banaadir region on the Indian Ocean , the city has served as an important port for millennia .
, it has a population of 2,425,000 residents .
Tradition and old records assert that southern Somalia , including the Mogadishu area , was historically inhabited by hunter-gatherers .
These were later joined by Cushitic-speaking agro-pastoralists , who would go on to establish local aristocracies .
During its medieval Golden Age , Mogadishu was ruled by the Muzaffar dynasty , a vassal of the Ajuran Sultanate .
It subsequently fell under the control of an assortment of local Sultanates and polities , most notably the Sultanate of the Geledi .
The city later became the capital of Italian Somaliland -LRB- 1889 -- 1936 -RRB- in the colonial period .
After the Somali Republic became independent in 1960 , Mogadishu became known and promoted as the White Pearl of the Indian Ocean .
After the ousting of the Siad Barre regime in 1991 and the ensuing Somali Civil War , various militias fought for control of the city , later to be replaced by the Islamic Courts Union in the mid-2000s .
The ICU thereafter splintered into more radical groups , notably al-Shabaab , which fought the Transitional Federal Government -LRB- 2004 -- 2012 -RRB- and its African Union Mission to Somalia allies .
With a change in administration in late 2010 , government troops and their military partners had succeeded in forcing out Al-Shabaab by August 2011 .
Mogadishu has subsequently experienced a period of intense reconstruction .
As Somalia 's capital city , many important national institutions are based in Mogadishu .
It is the seat of the Federal Government of Somalia established in August 2012 , with the Somalia Federal Parliament serving as the government 's legislative branch .
Thabit Abdi Mohammed has been the Mayor of Mogadishu since April 2017 .
Villa Somalia is the official residential palace and principal workplace of the President of Somalia , Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed .
In May 2012 , the First Somali Bank was established in the capital , which organized Mogadishu 's first ever Technology , Entertainment , Design -LRB- TEDx -RRB- conference .
The establishment of a local construction yard has also galvanized the city 's real-estate sector .
Arba'a Rukun Mosque is one of the oldest Islamic places of worship in the capital , built circa 667 -LRB- 1268/9 AD -RRB- .
The Mosque of Islamic Solidarity in Mogadishu is the largest masjid in the Horn region .
Mogadishu Cathedral was built in 1928 by the colonial authorities in Italian Somaliland in a Norman Gothic style , and served as the traditional seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Mogadiscio .
The National Museum of Somalia is based in Mogadishu and holds many culturally important artefacts .
The National Library of Somalia is undergoing a $ 1 million Somali federal government funded renovation , including a new library complex .
Mogadishu is home to a number of scholastic and media institutions .
As part of the municipality 's urban renewal program , 100 schools across the capital are scheduled to be refurbished and reopened .
The Somali National University -LRB- SNU -RRB- was established in the 1950s , and professors from the university later founded the non-governmental Mogadishu University -LRB- MU -RRB- .
Benadir University -LRB- BU -RRB- was established in 2002 with the intention of training doctors .
Various national sporting bodies have their headquarters in Mogadishu , including the Somali Football Federation and the Somali Olympic Committee .
Mogadishu Stadium was constructed in 1978 during the Siad Barre administration , with the assistance of Chinese engineers .
It hosts football matches with teams from the Somali First Division and the Somalia Cup .
Additionally , the Port of Mogadishu serves as a major national seaport and is the largest harbour in Somalia .
Mogadishu International Airport , the capital 's main airport , is the hub of the national carrier Somali Airlines .