Mormons -LRB- -LSB- ˈmɔrmənz -RSB- -RRB- are a religious and cultural group related to Mormonism , the principal branch of the Latter Day Saint movement of Restorationist Christianity , initiated by Joseph Smith in upstate New York during the 1820s .
After Smith 's death in 1844 , the Mormons followed Brigham Young to what would become the Utah Territory .
Today , most Mormons are understood to be members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints -LRB- LDS Church -RRB- .
Some Mormons are also either independent or non-practicing .
The center of Mormon cultural influence is in Utah , and North America has more Mormons than any other continent , though the majority of Mormons live outside the United States .
Mormons have developed a strong sense of communality that stems from their doctrine and history .
During the 19th century , Mormon converts tended to gather to a central geographic location , and between 1852 and 1890 a minority of Mormons openly practiced plural marriage , a form of religious polygamy .
Mormons dedicate large amounts of time and resources to serving in their church , and many young Mormons choose to serve a full-time proselytizing mission .
Mormons have a health code which eschews alcoholic beverages , tobacco , coffee , tea , and other addictive substances .
They tend to be very family-oriented , and have strong connections across generations and with extended family , reflective of their belief that families can be sealed together beyond death .
Mormons also have a strict law of chastity , requiring abstention from sexual relations outside of heterosexual marriage and fidelity within marriage .
Mormons self-identify as Christian , although some non-Mormons consider Mormons non-Christian and some of their beliefs differ from mainstream Christianity .
Mormons believe in the Bible , as well as other books of scripture , such as the Book of Mormon .
They have a unique view of cosmology , and believe that all people are spirit-children of God .
Mormons believe that returning to God requires following the example of Jesus Christ , and accepting his atonement through ordinances such as baptism .
They believe that Christ 's church was restored through Joseph Smith and is guided by living prophets and apostles .
Central to Mormon faith is the belief that God speaks to his children and answers their prayers .
Due to their high birth and conversion rates , the Mormon population has grown significantly in recent decades .
The number of members in 1971 was 3,090,953 and now in 2017 based on the Annual Report , there are 15,882,417 worldwide .