Morse code is a method of transmitting text information as a series of on-off tones , lights , or clicks that can be directly understood by a skilled listener or observer without special equipment .
It is named for Samuel F. B. Morse , an inventor of the telegraph .
The International Morse Code encodes the ISO basic Latin alphabet , some extra Latin letters , the Arabic numerals and a small set of punctuation and procedural signals -LRB- prosigns -RRB- as standardized sequences of short and long signals called `` dots '' and `` dashes '' , or `` dits '' and `` dahs '' , as in amateur radio practice .
Because many non-English natural languages use more than the 26 Roman letters , extensions to the Morse alphabet exist for those languages .
Each Morse code symbol represents either a text character -LRB- letter or numeral -RRB- or a prosign and is represented by a unique sequence of dots and dashes .
The duration of a dash is three times the duration of a dot .
Each dot or dash is followed by a short silence , equal to the dot duration .
The letters of a word are separated by a space equal to three dots -LRB- one dash -RRB- , and the words are separated by a space equal to seven dots .
The dot duration is the basic unit of time measurement in code transmission .
To increase the speed of the communication , the code was designed so that the length of each character in Morse varies approximately inversely to its frequency of occurrence in English .
Thus the most common letter in English , the letter `` E '' , has the shortest code , a single dot .
Morse code is used by some amateur radio operators , although knowledge of and proficiency with it is no longer required for licensing in most countries .
Pilots and air traffic controllers usually need only a cursory understanding .
Aeronautical navigational aids , such as VORs and NDBs , constantly identify in Morse code .
Compared to voice , Morse code is less sensitive to poor signal conditions , yet still comprehensible to humans without a decoding device .
Morse is , therefore , a useful alternative to synthesized speech for sending automated data to skilled listeners on voice channels .
Many amateur radio repeaters , for example , identify with Morse , even though they are used for voice communications .
In an emergency , Morse code can be sent by improvised methods that can be easily `` keyed '' on and off , making it one of the simplest and most versatile methods of telecommunication .
The most common distress signal is SOS or three dots , three dashes , and three dots , internationally recognized by treaty .