Moscow is the capital and most populous city of Russia , with 13.2 million residents within the city limits and 17.8 million within the urban area .
Moscow has the status of a Russian federal city .
Moscow is a major political , economic , cultural , and scientific centre of Russia and Eastern Europe , as well as the largest city entirely on the European continent .
By broader definitions Moscow is among the world 's largest cities , being the 14th largest metro area , the 18th largest agglomeration , the 15th largest urban area , and the 11th largest by population within city limits worldwide .
According to Forbes 2013 , Moscow has been ranked as the ninth most expensive city in the world by Mercer and has one of the world 's largest urban economies , being ranked as an alpha global city according to the Globalization and World Cities Research Network , and is also one of the fastest growing tourist destinations in the world according to the MasterCard Global Destination Cities Index .
Moscow is the northernmost and coldest megacity and metropolis on Earth .
It is home to the Ostankino Tower , the tallest free standing structure in Europe ; the Federation Tower , the tallest skyscraper in Europe ; and the Moscow International Business Center .
By its territorial expansion on July 1 , 2012 southwest into the Moscow Oblast , the area of the capital more than doubled , going from 1091 to , and it gained an additional population of 233,000 people .
Moscow is situated on the Moskva River in the Central Federal District of European Russia , making it the world 's most populated inland city .
The city is well known for its architecture , particularly its historic buildings such as Saint Basil 's Cathedral with its brightly coloured domes .
With over 40 percent of its territory covered by greenery , it is one of the greenest capitals and major cities in Europe and the world , having the largest forest in an urban area within its borders -- more than any other major city -- even before its expansion in 2012 .
The city has served as the capital of a progression of states , from the medieval Grand Duchy of Moscow and the subsequent Tsardom of Russia to the Russian Empire to the Soviet Union and the contemporary Russian Federation .
Moscow is considered the centre of Russian culture , having served as the home of Russian artists , scientists and sports figures and because of the presence of museums , academic and political institutions and theatres .
Moscow is the seat of power of the Government of Russia , being the site of the Moscow Kremlin , a medieval city-fortress that is today the residence for work of the President of Russia .
The Moscow Kremlin and Red Square are also one of several World Heritage Sites in the city .
Both chambers of the Russian parliament -LRB- the State Duma and the Federation Council -RRB- also sit in the city .
The city is served by a transit network , which includes four international airports , nine railway terminals , numerous trams , a monorail system and one of the deepest underground rapid transit systems in the world , the Moscow Metro , the fourth-largest in the world and largest outside of Asia in terms of passenger numbers , and the busiest in Europe .
It is recognised as one of the city 's landmarks due to the rich architecture of its 200 stations .
Moscow has acquired a number of epithets , most referring to its size and preeminent status within the nation : The Third Rome , The Whitestone One , The First Throne , The Forty Forties , and The Hero City .
In old Russian the word '' Сорок '' -LRB- forty -RRB- also meant a church administrative district , which consisted of about forty churches .
The demonym for a Moscow resident is '' москвич '' -LRB- moskvich -RRB- for male or '' москвичка '' -LRB- moskvichka -RRB- for female , rendered in English as Muscovite .