Motorola -LRB- -LSB- ˌmoʊtəˈroʊlə -RSB- -RRB- was an American multinational telecommunications company founded on September 25 , 1928 , based in Schaumburg , Illinois .
After having lost $ 4.3 billion from 2007 to 2009 , the company was divided into two independent public companies , Motorola Mobility and Motorola Solutions on January 4 , 2011 .
Motorola Solutions is generally considered to be the direct successor to Motorola , as the reorganization was structured with Motorola Mobility being spun off .
Motorola Mobility was acquired by Lenovo in 2014 .
Motorola designed and sold wireless network equipment such as cellular transmission base stations and signal amplifiers .
Motorola 's home and broadcast network products included set-top boxes , digital video recorders , and network equipment used to enable video broadcasting , computer telephony , and high-definition television .
Its business and government customers consisted mainly of wireless voice and broadband systems -LRB- used to build private networks -RRB- , and public safety communications systems like Astro and Dimetra .
These businesses -LRB- except for set-top boxes and cable modems -RRB- are now part of Motorola Solutions .
Google sold Motorola Home -LRB- the former General Instrument cable businesses -RRB- to the Arris Group in December 2012 for US$ 2.35 billion .
Motorola 's wireless telephone handset division was a pioneer in cellular telephones .
Also known as the Personal Communication Sector -LRB- PCS -RRB- prior to 2004 , it pioneered the `` mobile phone '' with DynaTAC , `` flip phone '' with the MicroTAC as well as the `` clam phone '' with the StarTAC in the mid-1990s .
It had staged a resurgence by the mid-2000s with the RAZR , but lost market share in the second half of that decade .
Later it focused on smartphones using Google 's open-source Android mobile operating system .
The first phone to use the newest version of Google 's open source OS , Android 2.0 , was released on November 2 , 2009 as the Motorola Droid -LRB- the GSM version launched a month later , in Europe , as the Motorola Milestone -RRB- .
The handset division -LRB- along with cable set-top boxes and cable modems -RRB- was later spun off into the independent Motorola Mobility .
On May 22 , 2012 , Google CEO Larry Page announced that Google had closed on its deal to acquire Motorola Mobility .
On January 29 , 2014 , Page announced that pending closure of the deal , Motorola Mobility would be acquired by Chinese technology company Lenovo for US$ 2.91 billion -LRB- subject to certain adjustments -RRB- .
On October 30 , 2014 , Lenovo finalized its purchase of Motorola Mobility from Google .