Music is an art form and cultural activity whose medium is sound organized in time .
The common elements of music are pitch -LRB- which governs melody and harmony -RRB- , rhythm -LRB- and its associated concepts tempo , meter , and articulation -RRB- , dynamics -LRB- loudness and softness -RRB- , and the sonic qualities of timbre and texture -LRB- which are sometimes termed the `` color '' of a musical sound -RRB- .
Different styles or types of music may emphasize , de-emphasize or omit some of these elements .
Music is performed with a vast range of instruments and vocal techniques ranging from singing to rapping ; there are solely instrumental pieces , solely vocal pieces -LRB- such as songs without instrumental accompaniment -RRB- and pieces that combine singing and instruments .
The word derives from Greek μουσική #Ancient Greek -LRB- mousike ; `` art of the Muses '' -RRB- .
In its most general form , the activities describing music as an art form or cultural activity include the creation of works of music -LRB- songs , tunes , symphonies , and so on -RRB- , the criticism of music , the study of the history of music , and the aesthetic examination of music .
Ancient Greek and Indian philosophers defined music as tones ordered horizontally as melodies and vertically as harmonies .
Common sayings such as `` the harmony of the spheres '' and `` it is music to my ears '' point to the notion that music is often ordered and pleasant to listen to .
However , 20th-century composer John Cage thought that any sound can be music , saying , for example , `` There is no noise , only sound . ''
The creation , performance , significance , and even the definition of music vary according to culture and social context .
Indeed , throughout history , some new forms or styles of music have been criticized as `` not being music '' , including Beethoven 's Grosse Fuge string quartet in 1825 , early jazz in the beginning of the 1900s and hardcore punk in the 1980s .
There are many types of music , including popular music , traditional music , art music , music written for religious ceremonies and work songs such as chanteys .
Music ranges from strictly organized compositions -- such as Classical music symphonies from the 1700s and 1800s , through to spontaneously played improvisational music such as jazz , and avant-garde styles of chance-based contemporary music from the 20th and 21st centuries .
Music can be divided into genres -LRB- e.g. , country music -RRB- and genres can be further divided into subgenres -LRB- e.g. , country blues and pop country are two of the many country subgenres -RRB- , although the dividing lines and relationships between music genres are often subtle , sometimes open to personal interpretation , and occasionally controversial .
For example , it can be hard to draw the line between some early 1980s hard rock and heavy metal .
Within the arts , music may be classified as a performing art , a fine art or as an auditory art .
Music may be played or sung and heard live at a rock concert or orchestra performance , heard live as part of a dramatic work -LRB- a music theater show or opera -RRB- , or it may be recorded and listened to on a radio , MP3 player , CD player , smartphone or as film score or TV show .
In many cultures , music is an important part of people 's way of life , as it plays a key role in religious rituals , rite of passage ceremonies -LRB- e.g. , graduation and marriage -RRB- , social activities -LRB- e.g. , dancing -RRB- and cultural activities ranging from amateur karaoke singing to playing in an amateur funk band or singing in a community choir .
People may make music as a hobby , like a teen playing cello in a youth orchestra , or work as a professional musician or singer .
The music industry includes the individuals who create new songs and musical pieces -LRB- such as songwriters and composers -RRB- , individuals who perform music -LRB- which include orchestra , jazz band and rock band musicians , singers and conductors -RRB- , individuals who record music -LRB- music producers and sound engineers -RRB- , individuals who organize concert tours , and individuals who sell recordings and sheet music and scores to customers .