Myles Richard Kennedy -LRB- born Myles Richard Bass ; November 27 , 1969 -RRB- is an American musician , singer , and songwriter , best known as the lead vocalist and rhythm guitarist of the rock band Alter Bridge , and as the lead vocalist in guitarist Slash 's backing band , known as Myles Kennedy and the Conspirators .
A former guitar instructor from Spokane , Washington , he has worked as a session musician and songwriter , making both studio and live appearances with several artists , and has been involved with several projects throughout his career .
Born in Boston , Massachusetts , and raised in Northern Idaho and Spokane , Kennedy attended Spokane Falls Community College to study music theory .
He began his music career in 1990 as the lead guitarist of the instrumental jazz ensemble Cosmic Dust , with which he released one studio album .
His second band , Citizen Swing , released two studio albums before disbanding in 1996 .
With fellow Citizen Swing member Craig Johnson , Kennedy founded the rock band The Mayfield Four , for which he provided lead vocals and guitar .
The band released two studio albums and broke up in 2002 .
After declining an offer to audition as the lead vocalist of Velvet Revolver , he was asked to join Alter Bridge by Mark Tremonti in late 2003 , formally joining in 2004 , and he has been with the band ever since .
He has released five studio albums with Alter Bridge .
While Alter Bridge was on tour in 2008 , Kennedy collaborated with former members of Led Zeppelin on an undisclosed project , though the band never fully materialized and the songs he wrote with Jimmy Page , John Paul Jones , and Jason Bonham remain unreleased .
He then started working with Slash , featuring on the guitarist 's 2010 eponymous solo album on two tracks and later serving as Slash 's vocalist on tour .
With Slash , Myles Kennedy and the Conspirators have recorded two studio albums .
He has also been at work on a solo project of his own off and on since 2009 .