Nanotechnology -LRB- `` nanotech '' -RRB- is manipulation of matter on an atomic , molecular , and supramolecular scale .
The earliest , widespread description of nanotechnology referred to the particular technological goal of precisely manipulating atoms and molecules for fabrication of macroscale products , also now referred to as molecular nanotechnology .
A more generalized description of nanotechnology was subsequently established by the National Nanotechnology Initiative , which defines nanotechnology as the manipulation of matter with at least one dimension sized from 1 to 100 nanometers .
This definition reflects the fact that quantum mechanical effects are important at this quantum-realm scale , and so the definition shifted from a particular technological goal to a research category inclusive of all types of research and technologies that deal with the special properties of matter which occur below the given size threshold .
It is therefore common to see the plural form `` nanotechnologies '' as well as `` nanoscale technologies '' to refer to the broad range of research and applications whose common trait is size .
Because of the variety of potential applications -LRB- including industrial and military -RRB- , governments have invested billions of dollars in nanotechnology research .
Until 2012 , through its National Nanotechnology Initiative , the USA has invested 3.7 billion dollars , the European Union has invested 1.2 billion and Japan 750 million dollars .
Nanotechnology as defined by size is naturally very broad , including fields of science as diverse as surface science , organic chemistry , molecular biology , semiconductor physics , microfabrication , molecular engineering , etc. .
The associated research and applications are equally diverse , ranging from extensions of conventional device physics to completely new approaches based upon molecular self-assembly , from developing new materials with dimensions on the nanoscale to direct control of matter on the atomic scale .
Scientists currently debate the future implications of nanotechnology .
Nanotechnology may be able to create many new materials and devices with a vast range of applications , such as in nanomedicine , nanoelectronics , biomaterials energy production , and consumer products .
On the other hand , nanotechnology raises many of the same issues as any new technology , including concerns about the toxicity and environmental impact of nanomaterials , and their potential effects on global economics , as well as speculation about various doomsday scenarios .
These concerns have led to a debate among advocacy groups and governments on whether special regulation of nanotechnology is warranted .