Naples -LRB- -LSB- ˈneɪpəlz -RSB- Napoli -LSB- ˈnaːpoli -RSB- , Neapolitan : Napule -LSB- - napˈnɑːpələ -RSB- or -LSB- - napˈnɑːpulə -RSB- Neapolis Νεάπολις , meaning `` new city '' -RRB- is the capital of the Italian region Campania and the third-largest municipality in Italy , after Rome and Milan .
In 2015 , around 975,260 people lived within the city 's administrative limits .
The Metropolitan City of Naples had a population of 3,115,320 .
Naples is the 9th-most populous urban area in the European Union with a population of between 3 million and 3.7 million .
About 4.4 million people live in the Naples metropolitan area , one of the largest metropolises on the Mediterranean Sea .
Naples is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world .
Bronze Age Greek settlements were established in the Naples area in the second millennium BC .
A larger colony -- initially known as Parthenope , Παρθενόπη -- developed on the Island of Megaride around the ninth century BC , at the end of the Greek Dark Ages .
The city was refounded as Neápolis in the sixth century BC and became a lynchpin of Magna Graecia , playing a key role in the merging of Greek culture into Roman society and eventually becoming a cultural centre of the Roman Republic .
Naples remained influential after the fall of the Western Roman Empire , serving as the capital city of the Kingdom of Naples between 1282 and 1816 .
Thereafter , in union with Sicily , it became the capital of the Two Sicilies until the unification of Italy in 1861 .
Naples was the most-bombed Italian city during World War II .
Much of the city 's 20th-century periphery was constructed under Benito Mussolini 's fascist government , and during reconstruction efforts after World War II .
In recent decades , Naples has constructed a large business district , the Centro Direzionale , and has developed an advanced transport infrastructure , including an Alta Velocità high-speed rail link to Rome and Salerno , and an expanded subway network , which is planned to eventually cover half of the region .
The city has experienced significant economic growth in recent decades , and unemployment levels in the city and surrounding Campania have decreased since 1999 .
However , Naples still suffers from political and economic corruption , and unemployment levels remain high .
Naples has the fourth-largest urban economy in Italy , after Milan , Rome and Turin .
It is the world 's 103rd-richest city by purchasing power , with an estimated 2011 GDP of US$ 83.6 billion .
The port of Naples is one of the most important in Europe , and has the world 's second-highest level of passenger flow , after the port of Hong Kong .
Numerous major Italian companies , such as MSC Cruises Italy S.p.A , are headquartered in Naples .
The city also hosts NATO 's Allied Joint Force Command Naples , the SRM Institution for Economic Research and the OPE Company and Study Centre .
Naples was a full member of the Eurocities network of European cities .
The city was selected to become the headquarters of the European institution ACP/UE and was named a City of Literature by UNESCO 's Creative Cities Network .
The Villa Rosebery , one of the three official residences of the President of Italy , is located in the city 's Posillipo district .
Naples ' historic city centre is the largest in Europe , covering 1700 ha and enclosing 27 centuries of history , and is listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site .
Naples has long been a major cultural centre with a global sphere of influence , particularly during the Renaissance and Enlightenment eras .
In the immediate vicinity of Naples are numerous culturally and historically significant sites , including the Palace of Caserta and the Roman ruins of Pompeii and Herculaneum .
Culinarily , Naples is synonymous with pizza , which originated in the city .
Neapolitan music has furthermore been highly influential , credited with the invention of the romantic guitar and the mandolin , as well as notable contributions to opera and folk standards .
Popular characters and historical figures who have come to symbolise the city include Januarius , the patron saint of Naples , the comic figure Pulcinella , and the Sirens from the Greek epic poem the Odyssey .
According to CNN , the metro stop `` Toledo '' is the most beautiful in Europe and it won also the LEAF Award ' 2013 as `` Public building of the year '' .
Naples is the Italian city with the highest number of accredited stars from the Michelin Guide .
Naples ' sports scene is dominated by football and Serie A club S.S.C. Napoli , two-time Italian champions and winner of European trophies , who play at the San Paolo Stadium in the south-west of the city .