Narendra Damodardas Modi -LRB- -LSB- ˈnəɾeːnd̪rə d̪aːmoːd̪əɾˈd̪aːs ˈmoːd̪iː -RSB- , born 17 September 1950 -RRB- is an Indian politician who is the 14th and current Prime Minister of India , in office since May 2014 .
He was the Chief Minister of Gujarat from 2001 to 2014 , and is the Member of Parliament for Varanasi .
Modi , a member of the Bharatiya Janata Party -LRB- BJP -RRB- , is a Hindu nationalist and member of the right-wing Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh -LRB- RSS -RRB- .
Born to a Gujarati family in Vadnagar , Modi helped his father sell tea as a child , and later ran his own stall .
He was introduced to the RSS at the age of eight , beginning a long association with the organisation .
He left home after graduating from school , partly because of an arranged marriage which he rejected .
Modi traveled around India for two years , and visited a number of religious centres .
He returned to Gujarat and moved to Ahmedabad in 1969 or 1970 .
In 1971 he became a full-time worker for the RSS .
During the state of emergency imposed across the country in 1975 , Modi was forced to go into hiding .
The RSS assigned him to the BJP in 1985 , and he held several positions within the party hierarchy until 2001 , rising to the rank of general secretary .
Modi was appointed Chief Minister of Gujarat in 2001 , due to Keshubhai Patel 's failing health and poor public image following the earthquake in Bhuj .
Modi was elected to the legislative assembly soon after .
His administration has been considered complicit in the 2002 Gujarat riots , or otherwise criticised for its handling of it , although a court found no evidence to prosecute Modi .
His policies as chief minister , credited with encouraging economic growth , have received praise .
His administration has been criticised for failing to significantly improve health , poverty , and education indices in the state .
Modi led the BJP in the 2014 general election , which gave the party a majority in the Lok Sabha , the first time a single party had achieved this since 1984 .
Modi himself was elected to parliament from Varanasi .
Since taking office , Modi 's administration has tried to raise foreign direct investment in the Indian economy , increased spending on infrastructure , and reduced spending on healthcare and social welfare programmes .
Modi has attempted to improve efficiency in the bureaucracy , and centralised power through the abolition of the planning commission .
He has begun a high-profile sanitation campaign , and weakened or abolished environmental and labour laws .
Credited with engineering a political realignment towards right-wing politics , Modi remains a figure of controversy domestically and internationally over his Hindu nationalist beliefs and his role during the 2002 Gujarat riots , cited as evidence of an exclusionary social agenda .