The Nashville Songwriters Association International is a 501 -LRB- c -RRB- not-for-profit trade organization that works to help songwriters in three ways : through legislative advocacy , through education and advice about the actual craft of songwriting , and through teaching about the music industry , and how to best position a song for success within it .
They own the Bluebird Cafe .
HISTORY OF NSAI
As songwriters know , sometimes the best ideas appear during lunch , and that was the case more than 40 years ago with songwriters Eddie Miller , Buddy Mize and Bill Brock .
In 1967 , over lunch at Ireland 's Restaurant in Nashville , the three came up with an idea to build a community : a songwriters association .
That kernel of an idea , planted and nurtured four decades ago , took root and has since grown into the 4,500 + member Nashville Songwriters Association International -LRB- NSAI -RRB- , which today promotes awareness of songwriters ' cultural contributions -LRB- through events such as Tin Pan South Songwriters Festival -RRB- , champions the legal rights of professional songwriters and helps develop the abilities of aspiring songwriters .
But such growth and prosperity did n't occur overnight .
Back in the late ` 60s , Nashville 's songwriting community consisted of only a few dozen writers who received little credit for their achievements and whose royalty compensation was small , largely because of an antiquated copyright law .
Additionally , outside of the performing rights societies ASCAP , BMI and SESAC , songwriter recognition was virtually non-existent .
Then , one November day in 1967 , Miller -LRB- a 1975 inductee into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame and founding member of the Academy of Country Music in California -RRB- encouraged fellow songwriters Mize and Brock to begin an association for writers in Nashville .
Mize and Brock loved the idea , and all three set out to make it happen .
Within a month , Eddie , Buddy and Bill were conducting the group 's first organizational meeting at the Old Professional 's Club on Music Row .
The meeting attracted some 40 songwriters , including Liz & Casey Anderson -LRB- `` The Fugitive '' -RRB- , Felice & Boudleaux Bryant -LRB- `` Wake Up Little Susie '' -RRB- , Kris Kristofferson -LRB- `` Me And Bobby McGee '' -RRB- and Marijohn Wilkin -LRB- `` One Day At A Time '' -RRB- .
Those 40 -- more than half the songwriters in town at that time -- became the founding membership of NSAI and began spending countless hours around Marijohn 's kitchen table brainstorming , discussing and refining ideas .
Within a year , the Nashville Songwriters Association was chartered by the state of Tennessee as a not-for-profit trade association , and from that moment , NSAI would go on to make a difference for all songwriters by helping to revise antiquated copyright laws and to establish new intellectual property protection in the digital age , by establishing a network of over 90 songwriter workshops to provide local instruction at home and abroad , and by conducting more than a half dozen educational conferences and awards shows each year .
And though based in Nashville , NSAI represents all musical genres and includes songwriters from across the United States and overseas .
NSAI provides a haven for both proven and undiscovered writers -- to get a cup of coffee , to make a phone call or just to receive a word of advice or consolation .
To quote NSAI 's motto : `` IT ALL BEGINS WITH A SONG '' -- and , sometimes , it all begins over lunch .
About
The Nashville Songwriters Association International -LRB- NSAI -RRB- is the world 's largest not-for-profit songwriters trade association .
Established in 1967 , the membership of more than 5,000 active and pro members spans the United States and six other countries .
NSAI is dedicated to protecting the rights of and serving aspiring and professional songwriters in all genres of music .
Mission Statement
The Nashville Songwriters Association International -LRB- NSAI -RRB- consists of a body of creative minds , including songwriters from all genres of music , professional and amateur , who are committed to protecting the rights and future of the profession of songwriting , and to educate , elevate , and celebrate the songwriter and to act as a unifying force within the music community and the community at large .
The association was founded in the 1970s , with former singer-songwriter Lorene Mann as a co-founder .
Songwriters Caucus -- NSAI established Songwriters Caucuses in the United States House of Representatives and the United States Senate .
In Congress , a `` caucus '' is a group of like-minded lawmakers who share a philosophical pre-disposition to support an issue .
When NSAI has an issue before Congress , we now have caucus members who will help us by co-sponsoring legislation , allowing songwriters to testify , and using the power of their offices and the media to represent the songwriter view .
FEDERAL COURT CASES
Eldred vs. Ashcroft -- NSAI filed an `` amicus brief '' with the United States Supreme Court in a case that determined how long you and your heirs will own your copyrights .
NSAI was the only songwriter organization to meet with the Justice Department attorneys , arguing the case on behalf of copyright owners .
NSAI songwriter and Constitutional scholar Peter McCann researched the diaries of founding father James Madison .
Madison authored Section 1 , Article 8 of the United States Constitution that says : `` Congress may grant , for a ` limited time ' , to authors and composers ... '' At issue was the definition of `` limited time . ''
McCann found that Madison intended for his own diaries to be published after his death by his family , FOR PROFIT !
This compelling argument influlenced the Supreme Court 's decision in favor of copyright owners and their heirs .