Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif , is a Pakistani politician who is the 20th and current Prime Minister of Pakistan , in office since June 2013 .
He has previously also served as the Prime Minister from 1990 to 1993 and from 1997 to 1999 .
Born on 25 December 1949 into Sharif family in Lahore , he is the son of Ittefaq and Sharif Group founder Muhammad Sharif , and the elder-brother of three-time elected Punjab Chief Minister , Shehbaz .
Sharif studied business at Government College and later law at the University of Punjab before entering politics in the later 1970s .
In 1981 , Sharif was appointed by the military government as the Minister of Finance for the province of Punjab .
Backed by a loose coalition of conservatives , he was elected as the Chief Minister of Punjab in 1985 and re-elected after the end of martial law in 1988 .
In 1990 , Sharif led a conservative alliance to victory , leading him to become the Prime Minister .
Later it was blamed that the election was rigged in favor of Sharif by the Pakistani intelligence through channeling millions of rupees into his election campaign .
It should be noted that Sharif has an approximate net worth of 20.55 billion USD , as of 2017 .
Sharif 's first administration came to an end when then President Ghulam dismissed Sharif on corruption charges .
Sharif successfully challenged the dismissal in the Supreme Court , but both men were ultimately persuaded to step down in 1993 by army chief Waheed .
Sharif 's second term also saw tussles with the judiciary and the military .
Sharif also forcibly relieved General Karamat from command and replaced him with Musharraf in 1998 .
However , Kargil War deteriorated his relations with Musharraf .
When he attempted to relieve Musharraf from his command on 12 October 1999 , the military instead ousted Sharif 's government , exiling him to Saudi Arabia .
In 2013 elections , Sharif 's Muslim League formed a coalition government .
As a result , Sharif was elected Prime Minister by Parliament .
On security front , in 2015 the military launched an offensive to remove extremist groups in northwestern Pakistan and another paramilitary offensive in 2017 .
Sharif 's third term is also underpinned by social centrism rather than the social conservatism , which guided his prior two terms .
Sharif 's third term has brought macroeconomic stability with the help of substantial loans from IMF , and signed multi-billion investment deals with China .
However , has faced criticism over rising sovereign debt , which has risen by 35 % .
Sharif 's family has come under trial over Panama Papers .