The New Jersey Turnpike -LRB- NJTP -RRB- , colloquially known to New Jerseyans as `` the Turnpike '' , is a toll road in New Jersey , maintained by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority .
According to the International Bridge , Tunnel and Turnpike Association , the Turnpike is the nation 's sixth-busiest toll road and is one of the most heavily traveled highways in the United States .
Having a total length of 122.40 mi , the Turnpike 's southern terminus begins at Interstate 295 -LRB- I-295 -RRB- near the border of Pennsville and Carneys Point Townships in Salem County , one mile east of the Delaware Memorial Bridge .
Its northern terminus is located at the George Washington Bridge in Fort Lee , Bergen County .
The Turnpike is a major thoroughfare providing access to various localities in New Jersey , as well as Delaware , Pennsylvania , and New York .
The route divides into four roadways between exit 6 and exit 14 , with the inner lanes restricted to carrying only cars , and with the outer lanes for cars , trucks and buses .
The northern part of the mainline turnpike , along with the entirety of its extensions and spurs , is part of the Interstate Highway System , designated as I-95 between exit 6 and its northern end .
South of exit 6 , it has the unsigned Route 700 designation .
There are two extensions and two spurs , including the Newark Bay Extension at exit 14 , which carries I-78 ; the Pennsylvania Turnpike Extension -LRB- officially the Pearl Harbor Memorial Turnpike Extension -RRB- at exit 6 ; and the Eastern Spur and the Western Spur at the turnpike 's northernmost end .
Construction of the mainline from conceptualization to completion took 23 months , from 1950 to 1952 .
It was officially opened to traffic in November 1951 , between its southern terminus and exit 10 .
The Turnpike has 12 ft lanes , 10 ft shoulders , 13 rest areas named after notable residents of New Jersey , and unusual exit signage that was considered the pinnacle of highway building in the 1950s .
The Interstate Highway System took some of its design guidelines by copying the Turnpike 's design guidelines .
To some degree , the Turnpike is considered iconic in pop culture , having been referenced in music , film and television .