The New York Giants are a professional American football team based in the New York metropolitan area .
The Giants compete in the National Football League -LRB- NFL -RRB- as a member club of the league 's National Football Conference -LRB- NFC -RRB- East division .
The team plays its home games at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford , New Jersey , which it shares with the New York Jets in a unique arrangement .
The Giants hold their summer training camp at the Quest Diagnostics Training Center at the Meadowlands Sports Complex .
The Giants were one of five teams that joined the NFL in 1925 , and is the only one of that group still existing , as well as the league 's longest-established team in the Northeastern United States .
The team ranks third among all NFL franchises with eight NFL titles : four in the pre -- Super Bowl era -LRB- 1927 , 1934 , 1938 , 1956 -RRB- and four since the advent of the Super Bowl -LRB- Super Bowls XXI -LRB- 1986 -RRB- , XXV -LRB- 1990 -RRB- , XLII -LRB- 2007 -RRB- , and XLVI -LRB- 2011 -RRB- -RRB- , along with more championship appearances than any other team , with 19 overall appearances .
Their championship tally is surpassed only by the Green Bay Packers -LRB- 13 -RRB- and Chicago Bears -LRB- 9 -RRB- .
Throughout their history , the Giants have featured 28 Hall of Fame players , including NFL Most Valuable Player -LRB- MVP -RRB- award winners Mel Hein , Frank Gifford , Y. A. Tittle , and Lawrence Taylor .
To distinguish themselves from the professional baseball team of the same name , the football team was incorporated as the `` New York National League Football Company , Inc. '' in 1929 and changed to `` New York Football Giants , Inc. '' in 1937 .
While the baseball team moved to San Francisco after the 1957 season , the football team continues to use `` New York Football Giants , Inc. '' as its legal corporate name , and is often referred to by fans and sportscasters as the `` New York Football Giants '' .
The team has also acquired several nicknames , including `` Big Blue '' , the `` G-Men '' , and the `` Jints '' , an intentionally mangled contraction seen frequently in the New York Post and New York Daily News , originating from the baseball team when they were based in New York .
Additionally , the team as a whole is occasionally referred to as the `` Big Blue Wrecking Crew '' , even though this moniker primarily and originally refers to the Giants defensive unit during the 80s and early 90s -LRB- and before that to the Los Angeles Dodgers baseball teams of the late 1970s and early 1980s -RRB- .
The team 's heated rivalry with the Philadelphia Eagles is the oldest of the NFC East rivalries , dating all the way back to 1933 , and has been called the best rivalry in the NFL in the 21st century .