The New York Knickerbockers , commonly referred to as the Knicks , are an American professional basketball team based in New York City .
The Knicks compete in the National Basketball Association -LRB- NBA -RRB- as a member of the Atlantic Division of the Eastern Conference .
The team plays its home games at Madison Square Garden , located in the borough of Manhattan .
They are one of two NBA teams located in New York City ; the other is the Brooklyn Nets .
The team , established by Ned Irish in 1946 , was one of the founding members of the Basketball Association of America -LRB- BAA -RRB- , which became the NBA after merging with the rival National Basketball League -LRB- NBL -RRB- in 1949 .
Along with the Boston Celtics , the Knicks are one of only two original NBA teams still located in its original city .
The Knicks were successful during their early years and were constant playoff contenders under the franchise 's first head coach Joe Lapchick .
Beginning in 1950 , the Knicks made three consecutive appearances in the NBA Finals , all of which were losing efforts .
Lapchick resigned in 1956 and the team subsequently began to falter .
It was not until the late 1960s when Red Holzman became head coach that the Knicks began to regain their former dominance .
Holzman successfully guided the Knicks to two NBA championships , in 1970 and 1973 .
The Knicks of the 1980s had mixed success that included six playoff appearances ; however , they failed to participate in the NBA Finals .
The playoff-level Knicks of the 1990s were led by future Hall of Fame center Patrick Ewing ; this era was marked by passionate rivalries with the Chicago Bulls , Indiana Pacers , and Miami Heat .
During this time , they were known for playing tough defense under head coaches Pat Riley and Jeff Van Gundy .
During this era , the Knicks made two appearances in the NBA Finals , in 1994 and 1999 , though they were unable to win an NBA championship .
Since 2000 , the Knicks have struggled to regain their former glory .
In 2012 -- 13 , the franchise won its first division title in 19 years , but was eliminated in the second round of the playoffs by the Indiana Pacers .
According to a 2016 Forbes report , the Knicks were the most-valuable NBA franchise , worth approximately $ 3 billion .