Nicholas Jerry Jonas -LRB- born September 16 , 1992 -RRB- is an American singer , songwriter , producer , and actor .
Jonas began acting in theater at the age of seven , and released his debut single in 2002 .
He released his eponymous debut album in 2004 to little success , though it did catch the attention of Columbia Records .
Jonas opted to form a band with his older brothers , Joe and Kevin , known as the Jonas Brothers .
The group released their debut studio album It 's About Time through Columbia Records .
The record failed to achieve commercial success , thus the group parted ways with their label .
Their self-titled second studio album was released through Hollywood Records in 2007 , and became their breakthrough record .
The band became prominent figures on the Disney Channel during this time , gaining a large following through the network .
The band starred in the widely successful film Camp Rock -LRB- 2008 -RRB- .
The release of the band 's third studio album , A Little Bit Longer -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , helped the band achieve further success ; the album 's lead single hit the top five on the Billboard Hot 100 chart .
The release of their fourth studio album saw a decline in sales for the band , though was still fairly successful .
Jonas and his brothers starred in the Disney Channel series JONAS in 2009 and 2010 , though poor ratings led to its cancellation in 2010 .
It was later confirmed that the Jonas Brothers would be taking a hiatus , with Nick forming a new band known as Nick Jonas & the Administration .
The band released one studio album in 2010 , though it failed to achieve much commercial success .
Following the release , Jonas opted to focus on work in theater , and also had a recurring role on the television series Smash .
The Jonas Brothers briefly reunited in 2013 , though officially parted ways due to creative differences .
Jonas decided to return to his solo music career following the band 's disbandment , and began work on his second studio album .
He signed with Island Records , releasing Nick Jonas -LRB- 2014 -RRB- through the label .
The album entered the top ten of the Billboard 200 , while both of the album 's singles entered the top twenty of the Billboard Hot 100 .
The project was re-released as Nick Jonas X2 in 2015 .
The release helped provide Jonas with a new public image , earning him the title of a `` sex symbol '' .
Jonas later co-founded Safehouse Records , a record label in conjunction with Island Records and Hollywood Records .
Jonas released his third studio album , Last Year Was Complicated -LRB- 2016 -RRB- , through the label .
The project became his highest peaking entry as a solo artist on the Billboard 200 , while the lead single was a top twenty hit on the Billboard Hot 100 .