Onika Tanya Maraj -LRB- born December 8 , 1982 -RRB- , known professionally as Nicki Minaj -LRB- -LSB- langpronnɪkɪ_mɪ ` nɑːdʒ -RSB- -RRB- , is a Trinidadian-born American rapper , singer , songwriter and model .
Born in Saint James , Trinidad and Tobago -LRB- a district of Trinidad 's capital Port of Spain -RRB- and raised in South Jamaica , Queens , New York , Minaj earned public attention after releasing three mixtapes between 2007 and 2009 .
She has been signed to Young Money Entertainment since 2009 .
Minaj 's first and second studio albums , Pink Friday -LRB- 2010 -RRB- and Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded -LRB- 2012 -RRB- , both peaked at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 and produced the successful singles `` Super Bass '' and `` Starships '' , respectively .
In 2010 , Minaj became the first female solo artist to have seven singles simultaneously charting on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 .
Her third studio album , The Pinkprint -LRB- 2014 -RRB- , was preceded by its second single , `` Anaconda '' , which peaked at number two on the Hot 100 and is her highest-charting single in the U.S. to date .
Minaj made her film debut in the 2012 animated film Ice Age : Continental Drift , followed by supporting roles in The Other Woman -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and Barbershop : The Next Cut -LRB- 2016 -RRB- .
In 2013 , she was a judge on the twelfth season of American Idol .
Minaj was the first female artist included on MTV 's Annual Hottest MC List , with a New York Times editor saying that some consider her to be `` the most influential female rapper of all time '' .
In 2016 , Minaj was included on the annual Time 100 list of the most influential people in the world .
Her rapping is distinctive for its fast flow and the use of alter egos and accents , primarily British cockney .
Early in her career , Minaj was known for her colorful costumes and wigs .
She has the most Billboard Hot 100 entries for a female artist in the chart 's history , while being ninth overall .
Minaj has received ten Grammy nominations throughout her career , and has won six American Music Awards , eleven BET Awards , three MTV Video Music Awards , four Billboard Music Awards , and was the recipient of Billboards Women in Music 2011 Rising Star award .
She has endorsed Adidas , MAC Cosmetics and Pepsi .
She has sold 20 million singles as a lead artist , and 60 million singles as a featured artist worldwide .