Nineteen Eighty-Four , often published as 1984 , is a dystopian novel published in 1949 by English author George Orwell .
The novel is set in Airstrip One -LRB- formerly known as Great Britain -RRB- , a province of the superstate Oceania in a world of perpetual war , omnipresent government surveillance , and public manipulation .
The superstate and its residents are dictated to by a political regime euphemistically named English Socialism , shortened to `` Ingsoc '' in Newspeak , the government 's invented language .
The superstate is under the control of the privileged elite of the Inner Party , a party and government that persecutes individualism and independent thinking as `` thoughtcrime '' , which is enforced by the `` Thought Police '' .
The tyranny is ostensibly overseen by Big Brother , the Party leader who enjoys an intense cult of personality , but who may not even exist .
The Party `` seeks power entirely for its own sake .
It is not interested in the good of others ; it is interested solely in power . ''
The protagonist of the novel , Winston Smith , is a member of the Outer Party , who works for the Ministry of Truth -LRB- or Minitrue in Newspeak -RRB- , which is responsible for propaganda and historical revisionism .
His job is to rewrite past newspaper articles , so that the historical record always supports the party line .
The instructions that the workers receive portray the corrections as fixing misquotations and never as what they really are : forgeries and falsifications .
A large part of the Ministry also actively destroys all documents that have not been edited and do not contain the revisions ; in this way , no proof exists that the government is lying .
Smith is a diligent and skillful worker but secretly hates the Party and dreams of rebellion against Big Brother .
The heroine of the novel , Julia , is based on Orwell 's second wife , Sonia Orwell .
As literary political fiction and dystopian science-fiction , Nineteen Eighty-Four is a classic novel in content , plot and style .
Many of its terms and concepts , such as Big Brother , doublethink , thoughtcrime , Newspeak , Room 101 , telescreen , 2 + 2 = 5 , and memory hole , have entered into common use since its publication in 1949 .
Nineteen Eighty-Four popularised the adjective Orwellian , which describes official deception , secret surveillance , and manipulation of recorded history by a totalitarian or authoritarian state .
In 2005 , the novel was chosen by Time magazine as one of the 100 best English-language novels from 1923 to 2005 .
It was awarded a place on both lists of Modern Library 100 Best Novels , reaching number 13 on the editor 's list , and 6 on the readers ' list .
In 2003 , the novel was listed at number 8 on the BBC 's survey The Big Read .