The Nintendo Switch is the seventh major home video game console developed by Nintendo .
Known in development by its codename NX , it was unveiled in October 2016 and was released worldwide on March 3 , 2017 .
Nintendo considers the Switch a `` hybrid '' console ; it is designed primarily as a home console , with the main unit inserted onto a docking station to connect to a television .
Alternatively , it can be removed from the dock and used similarly to a tablet computer through its LCD touchscreen , or placed in a standalone tabletop mode visible to several players .
The Switch uses Joy-Con wireless controllers , which include standard buttons and a directional joystick for user input , motion sensing , and high-definition tactile feedback .
The Joy-Con can attach to both sides of the console to support handheld-style play , connect to a Grip accessory to provide a traditional home console gamepad form , or be used individually in the hand like the Wii Remote and supporting local multiplayer modes .
The Switch 's software supports online gaming through standard Internet connectivity , as well as local wireless ad hoc connectivity with other Switch consoles .
Switch games and software are available on both physical flash ROM cartridges and digital distribution , and does not use region locking .
The concept of the Switch came about as Nintendo 's reaction to several quarters of financial losses into 2014 , attributed to poor sales of its previous console , the Wii U , and market competition from mobile gaming .
Then-Nintendo president Satoru Iwata pushed the company towards mobile gaming and novel hardware .
The Switch 's design is aimed at a wider demographic of video game players through the multiple modes of use , while retaining Nintendo 's hardware uniqueness and innovation .
Nintendo opted to use more standard electronic components , such as a chipset based on Nvidia 's Tegra line , to make development for the console easier for programmers and more compatible with existing game engines .
As the Wii U had struggled to gain external support leaving it with a weak software library , Nintendo preemptively sought the support of many third-party developers and publishers to help build out the Switch 's game library alongside Nintendo 's own first-party titles , including many independent video game studios .
Prior to launch , Nintendo had announced that over 100 titles were in development by 70 developers .
The console shipped over 2.74 million units in the first month of its launch , exceeding Nintendo 's initial projection of 2 million units , and making it the fastest-selling home console in its history .
Switch sales were highly tied to the critically acclaimed The Legend of Zelda : Breath of the Wild , released alongside the console 's launch worldwide .