Avram Noam Chomsky -LRB- -LSB- æ ` vrɑːm _ ` noʊm_ˈtʃɒmski -RSB- ; born December 7 , 1928 -RRB- is an American linguist , philosopher , cognitive scientist , historian , social critic , and political activist .
Sometimes described as `` the father of modern linguistics '' , Chomsky is also a major figure in analytic philosophy and one of the founders of the field of cognitive science .
He is Institute Professor Emeritus at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology -LRB- MIT -RRB- , where he has worked since 1955 , and is the author of over 100 books on topics such as linguistics , war , politics , and mass media .
Ideologically , he aligns with anarcho-syndicalism and libertarian socialism .
Born to middle-class Ashkenazi Jewish immigrants in Philadelphia , Chomsky developed an early interest in anarchism from alternative bookstores in New York City .
At the age of sixteen he began studies at the University of Pennsylvania , taking courses in linguistics , mathematics , and philosophy .
From 1951 to 1955 he was appointed to Harvard University 's Society of Fellows , where he developed the theory of transformational grammar for which he was awarded his doctorate in 1955 .
That year he began teaching at MIT , in 1957 emerging as a significant figure in the field of linguistics for his landmark work Syntactic Structures , which remodeled the scientific study of language , while from 1958 to 1959 he was a National Science Foundation fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study .
He is credited as the creator or co-creator of the universal grammar theory , the generative grammar theory , the Chomsky hierarchy , and the minimalist program .
Chomsky also played a pivotal role in the decline of behaviorism , being particularly critical of the work of B. F. Skinner .
An outspoken opponent of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War , which he saw as an act of American imperialism , in 1967 Chomsky attracted widespread public attention for his anti-war essay `` The Responsibility of Intellectuals '' .
Associated with the New Left , he was arrested multiple times for his activism and placed on President Richard Nixon 's Enemies List .
While expanding his work in linguistics over subsequent decades , he also became involved in the Linguistics Wars .
In collaboration with Edward S. Herman , Chomsky later co-wrote an analysis articulating the propaganda model of media criticism , and worked to expose the Indonesian occupation of East Timor .
However , his defense of unconditional freedom of speech -- including for Holocaust deniers -- generated significant controversy in the Faurisson affair of the early 1980s .
Following his retirement from active teaching , he has continued his vocal political activism , including opposing the War on Terror and supporting the Occupy movement .
One of the most cited scholars in history , Chomsky has influenced a broad array of academic fields .
He is widely recognized as a paradigm shifter who helped spark a major revolution in the human sciences , contributing to the development of a new cognitivistic framework for the study of language and the mind .
In addition to his continued scholarly research , he remains a leading critic of U.S. foreign policy , neoliberalism and contemporary state capitalism , the Israeli -- Palestinian conflict , and mainstream news media .
His ideas have proved highly significant within the anti-capitalist and anti-imperialist movements , but have also drawn criticism , with some accusing Chomsky of anti-Americanism .