Northwestern University -LRB- NU -RRB- is a private research university based in Evanston , Illinois , with campuses in Chicago , Illinois , and Doha , Qatar , and academic programs/facilities in Washington , D.C. , and San Francisco , California .
Composed of twelve schools and colleges , Northwestern offers 124 undergraduate degrees and 145 graduate and professional degrees .
It is considered one of the most prestigious universities in the United States , notably in social sciences where it ranks 11th worldwide .
Northwestern was founded in 1851 by John Evans , for whom the City of Evanston is named , and eight other lawyers , businessmen and Methodist leaders .
Its founding purpose was to serve the Northwest Territory , an area that today includes the states of Ohio , Indiana , Illinois , Michigan , Wisconsin and parts of Minnesota .
Instruction began in 1855 ; women were admitted in 1869 .
Today , the main campus is a 240 acre parcel in Evanston , along the shores of Lake Michigan 12 miles north of downtown Chicago .
The university 's law , medical , and professional schools are located on a 25 acre campus in Chicago 's Streeterville neighborhood .
In 2008 , the university opened a campus in Education City , Doha , Qatar with programs in journalism and communication .
In 2016 , Northwestern opened its San Francisco space at 44 Montgomery St. , which hosts journalism , engineering , and marketing programs .
Northwestern is a large research university with a comprehensive doctoral program and it attracts over $ 650 million in sponsored research each year .
Northwestern has the tenth largest university endowment in the United States , currently valued at $ 9.6 billion .
In 2017 , the university accepted 9.0 % of undergraduate applicants from a pool of 37,255 .
Northwestern is a founding member of the Big Ten Conference and remains the only private university in the conference .
The Northwestern Wildcats compete in 19 intercollegiate sports in the NCAA 's Division I Big Ten Conference .