North Korea , officially the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea -LRB- DPRK -RRB- , is a country in East Asia constituting the northern part of the Korean Peninsula .
Pyongyang is the nation 's capital and largest city .
To the north and northwest the country is bordered by China and by Russia along the Amnok -LRB- known as the Yalu in China -RRB- and Tumen rivers ; it is bordered to the south by South Korea , with the heavily fortified Korean Demilitarized Zone -LRB- DMZ -RRB- separating the two .
In 1910 , Korea was annexed by the Empire of Japan .
After the Japanese surrender at the end of World War II in 1945 , Korea was divided into two zones along the 38th parallel by the United States and the Soviet Union , with the north occupied by the Soviets and the south by the Americans .
Negotiations on reunification failed , and in 1948 , separate governments were formed : the socialist Democratic People 's Republic of Korea in the north , and the capitalist Republic of Korea in the south .
An invasion initiated by North Korea led to the Korean War -LRB- 1950 -- 1953 -RRB- .
The Korean Armistice Agreement brought about a ceasefire , but no peace treaty was signed .
North Korea officially describes itself as a self-reliant socialist state and formally holds elections .
Critics regard it as a totalitarian dictatorship .
Various media outlets have called it Stalinist , particularly noting the elaborate cult of personality around Kim Il-sung and his family .
International organizations have assessed that human rights violations in North Korea have no parallel in the contemporary world .
The Workers ' Party of Korea -LRB- WPK -RRB- , led by a member of the ruling family , holds power in the state and leads the Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland of which all political officers are required to be members .
Juche , an ideology of national self-reliance , was introduced into the constitution as a `` creative application of Marxism -- Leninism '' in 1972 .
The means of production are owned by the state through state-run enterprises and collectivized farms .
Most services such as healthcare , education , housing and food production are subsidized or state-funded .
From 1994 to 1998 , North Korea suffered a famine that resulted in the deaths of between 240,000 and 3.5 million people , and the country continues to struggle with food production .
North Korea follows Songun , or `` military-first '' policy .
It is the country with the highest number of military and paramilitary personnel , with a total of 9,495,000 active , reserve , and paramilitary personnel .
Its active duty army of 1.21 million is the fourth largest in the world , after China , the United States , and India .
It possesses nuclear weapons .
North Korea is an atheist state with no official religion and where public religion is discouraged .