The Odyssey '' ' -LRB- -LSB- ˈɒdəsi -RSB- Ὀδύσσεια Odýsseia , -LSB- o.dýs.sej.ja -RSB- in Classical Attic -RRB- is one of two major ancient Greek epic poems attributed to Homer .
It is , in part , a sequel to the Iliad , the other work ascribed to Homer .
The Odyssey is fundamental to the modern Western canon , and is the second-oldest extant work of Western literature ; the Iliad is the oldest .
Scholars believe the Odyssey was composed near the end of the 8th century BC , somewhere in Ionia , the Greek coastal region of Anatolia .
The poem mainly focuses on the Greek hero Odysseus -LRB- known as Ulysses in Roman myths -RRB- , king of Ithaca , and his journey home after the fall of Troy .
It takes Odysseus ten years to reach Ithaca after the ten-year Trojan War .
In his absence , it is assumed Odysseus has died , and his wife Penelope and son Telemachus must deal with a group of unruly suitors , the Mnesteres -LRB- Greek : Μνηστῆρες -RRB- or Proci , who compete for Penelope 's hand in marriage .
The Odyssey continues to be read in the Homeric Greek and translated into modern languages around the world .
Many scholars believe the original poem was composed in an oral tradition by an aoidos -LRB- epic poet/singer -RRB- , perhaps a rhapsode -LRB- professional performer -RRB- , and was more likely intended to be heard than read .
The details of the ancient oral performance and the story 's conversion to a written work inspire continual debate among scholars .
The Odyssey was written in a poetic dialect of Greek -- a literary amalgam of Aeolic Greek , Ionic Greek , and other Ancient Greek dialects -- and comprises 12,110 lines of dactylic hexameter .
Among the most noteworthy elements of the text are its non-linear plot , and the influence on events of choices made by women and slaves , besides the actions of fighting men .
In the English language as well as many others , the word odyssey has come to refer to an epic voyage .
The Odyssey has a lost sequel , the Telegony , which was not written by Homer .
It was usually attributed in antiquity to Cinaethon of Sparta .
In one source , the Telegony '' was said to have been stolen from Musaeus by either Eugamon or Eugammon of Cyrene -LRB- see Cyclic poets -RRB- .