Off the Wall is the fifth studio album by American singer Michael Jackson , released on August 10 , 1979 in the United States by Epic Records and internationally by CBS Records .
It was his nineteenth album in total since Diana Ross Presents The Jackson 5 -LRB- 1969 -RRB- , as well as his first album released through Epic Records , the label he would record on until his death roughly 30 years later .
It was released following Jackson 's critically well-received film performance in The Wiz .
While working on that project , Jackson and Quincy Jones had become friends , and Jones agreed to work with Jackson on his next studio album .
Recording sessions took place between December 1978 and June 1979 at Allen Zentz Recording , Westlake Recording Studios , and Cherokee Studios in Los Angeles , California .
Jackson collaborated with a number of writers and performers , such as Paul McCartney , Stevie Wonder and Rod Temperton .
Five singles were released from the album ; three of the singles had music videos released .
Jackson wrote three of the songs himself , including the number-one Grammy Award-winning single `` Do n't Stop 'Til You Get Enough '' .
The record was a departure from Jackson 's previous work for Motown Records .
Its lyrical themes on the record relate to escapism , liberation , loneliness , hedonism and romance .
Several critics observed that Off the Wall was crafted from funk , disco , soft rock , jazz , Broadway and pop ballads .
Jackson received positive reviews for his vocal performance on the record .
The record gained critical acclaim and recognition , and won the singer his first Grammy Award .
With Off the Wall , Jackson became the first solo artist to have four singles from the same album peak inside the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100 .
The album was an enormous commercial success ; as of 2014 it is certified eight times platinum in the United States and has reportedly sold more than 20 million copies worldwide , making it one of the best selling albums of all time .
On October 16 , 2001 , a special edition reissue of Off the Wall was released by Sony Records .
It was re-released on February 26 , 2016 .
Recent reviews by AllMusic and Blender have continued to praise Off the Wall for its appeal in the 21st century .
In 2003 , the album was placed at number 68 on Rolling Stone list of `` The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time '' .
The National Association of Recording Merchandisers listed it at number 80 on its list of the `` Definitive 200 Albums of All Time '' .
In 2008 , Off the Wall was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame .