Omar Ahmed Sayid Khadr -LRB- born September 19 , 1986 -RRB- is a Canadian who was detained at Guantanamo Bay as a minor and held there for 10 years .
In a firefight during the United States invasion of Afghanistan on July 27 , 2002 , in the village of Ayub Kheyl , in which several Taliban fighters were killed , Khadr , not yet 16 , was severely wounded .
After being detained at Bagram , he was sent to Guantanamo Bay detention camps , in Cuba .
During his detention , he was interrogated by Canadian as well as US intelligence officers .
He was imprisoned for throwing a grenade during the firefight that resulted in the death of an American soldier .
At the time , he was 15 years old and had been brought to Afghanistan by his father , who was affiliated with an extreme religious group .
He pleaded guilty to murder and several war crimes in October 2010 at a hearing by a United States military commission .
He was the youngest prisoner and last Western citizen to be held by the United States at Guantanamo Bay .
He accepted an eight-year sentence , not including time served , with the possibility of a transfer to Canada after at least one year to serve the remainder of the sentence .
Khadr was the first person since World War II to be prosecuted in a military commission for war crimes committed while still a minor .
His conviction and sentence were widely denounced by civil rights groups and various newspaper editorials .
His prosecution and imprisonment was condemned by the United Nations , which has taken up the issue of child soldiers .
On September 29 , 2012 , Khadr was repatriated to Canada to serve the remainder of his sentence in Canadian custody .
He was initially assigned to a maximum-security prison but moved to a medium-security prison in 2014 .
Khadr was released on bail in May 2015 -LRB- pending an appeal of his U.S. conviction -RRB- after the Alberta Court of Appeal refused to block his release as had been requested by the Canadian government .
In 2013 , Khadr filed a C$ 20,000,000 amended civil suit against the government of Canada for conspiring with the U.S. in abusing his rights .
He said he had signed the plea agreement because he believed it was the only way he could gain transfer from Guantanamo , and claimed that he had no memory of the firefight in which he was wounded .
Khadr 's lawyers successfully challenged his incarceration in Canada as an adult offender .
On May 14 , 2015 , the Supreme Court of Canada rejected the federal government 's position , ruling that Khadr had clearly been sentenced by the U.S. military tribunal as a minor .
If he loses his appeal of the US conviction , underway in a separate action , he would serve any remaining time in a provincial facility rather than in a federal penitentiary .