was a Japanese manga artist , cartoonist , animator , film producer , medical doctor and activist .
Born in Osaka Prefecture , his prolific output , pioneering techniques , and innovative redefinitions of genres earned him such titles as `` the father of manga '' , `` the godfather of manga '' and `` the god of manga '' .
Additionally , he is often considered the Japanese equivalent to Walt Disney , who served as a major inspiration during Tezuka 's formative years .
Born in Toyonaka Tezuka took an interest in art and animation at an early age when his father showed him his first Disney films .
As a young child Tezuka began to practice drawing so much that his mother would have to erase pages in his notebook in order to keep up with his output .
In elementary school he would develop his own comics and illustrations from which his skills would become formidable .
During high school in 1944 Tezuka was drafted into the military service to work in a factory .
Tezuka would begin studying medicine at the Osaka University in 1945 , during which he would begin to publish his first professional works .
Tezuka would begin what was known as the manga revolution in Japan with his New Treasure Island published in 1947 .
His legendary output would spawn some of the most influential , successful and well received manga series including Astro Boy , Jungle Emperor Leo , Black Jack , and Phoenix , all of which would win several awards .
During the 1960s Tezuka entered the animation industry in Japan by founding the production company Mushi Productions he would help innovate with industry with the broadcast of the animated version of Astro Boy in 1963 .
This series would create the first successful model for animation production in Japan and would also be the first Japanese animation dubbed into English for an American audience .
Other series were also translated to animation including Jungle Emperor Leo , the first Japanese animated series produced in full color .
In the 1970s Mushi Productions would collapse financially and the fallout would produce several influential animation production studios including Sunrise .
After Mushi Production 's failure Tezuka would found Tezuka Productions and continue experimenting with animation late into his life .
Tezuka died of stomach cancer in 1989 .
His death had an immediate impact on the Japanese public .
A museum was constructed in Takarazuka dedicated to his memory and life works and Tezuka received many posthumous awards .
Several animations were in production at the time of his death along with the final chapters of Phoenix which were never released .