Otto I -LRB- 23 November 912 -- 7 May 973 -RRB- , traditionally known as Otto I the Great -LRB- Otto I. der Große -RRB- , was German king from 936 and emperor of the Holy Roman Empire from 962 until his death in 973 .
He was the oldest son of Henry I the Fowler and Matilda .
Otto inherited the Duchy of Saxony and the kingship of the Germans upon his father 's death in 936 .
He continued his father 's work of unifying all German tribes into a single kingdom and greatly expanded the king 's powers at the expense of the aristocracy .
Through strategic marriages and personal appointments , Otto installed members of his family in the kingdom 's most important duchies .
This reduced the various dukes , who had previously been co-equals with the king , to royal subjects under his authority .
Otto transformed the Roman Catholic Church in Germany to strengthen royal authority and subjected its clergy to his personal control .
After putting down a brief civil war among the rebellious duchies , Otto defeated the Magyars at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955 , thus ending the Hungarian invasions of Western Europe .
The victory against the pagan Magyars earned Otto a reputation as a savior of Christendom and secured his hold over the kingdom .
By 961 , Otto had conquered the Kingdom of Italy and extended his realm 's borders to the north , east , and south .
The patronage of Otto and his immediate successors facilitated a so-called `` Ottonian Renaissance '' of arts and architecture .
Following the example of Charlemagne 's coronation as `` Emperor of the Romans '' in 800 , Otto was crowned Holy Roman Emperor in 962 by Pope John XII in Rome .
Otto 's later years were marked by conflicts with the papacy and struggles to stabilize his rule over Italy .
Reigning from Rome , Otto sought to improve relations with the Byzantine Empire , which opposed his claim to emperorship and his realm 's further expansion to the south .
To resolve this conflict , the Byzantine princess Theophanu married his son Otto II in April 972 .
Otto finally returned to Germany in August 972 and died at Memleben in May 973 .
Otto II succeeded him as Holy Roman Emperor .