Outkast -LRB- stylized as OutKast -RRB- is an American hip hop duo formed in 1991 , in East Point , Atlanta , Georgia , composed of Atlanta-based rappers André `` André 3000 '' Benjamin -LRB- formerly known as Dré -RRB- and Antwan `` Big Boi '' Patton .
The duo achieved both critical acclaim and commercial success in the 1990s and early 2000s , helping to popularize Southern hip hop while developing distinctive personas and experimenting with diverse genres such as funk , psychedelia , techno , and gospel .
Benjamin and Patton formed the group as high school students in 1991 .
OutKast released their debut album Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik in 1994 , which gained popularity after the single `` Player 's Ball '' reached number one on the Billboard Hot Rap Tracks chart .
With successive releases including ATLiens -LRB- 1996 -RRB- and Aquemini -LRB- 1998 -RRB- , the duo further developed their sound , experimenting with a variety of styles and achieving commercial success .
In 2000 , Outkast released the critically acclaimed Stankonia , which included the singles `` Ms. Jackson '' and `` B.O.B. ''
In 2003 , the duo released the double album Speakerboxxx/The Love Below , which featured the number one singles `` Hey Ya ! ''
and `` The Way You Move . ''
The album would eventually win the Grammy Award for Album of the Year and was certified Diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America .
Outkast next released the soundtrack for the 2006 musical film Idlewild , which they also starred in .
In 2007 , the duo went on hiatus and both members have since pursued solo careers .
In 2014 , Outkast reunited to celebrate their 20th anniversary by performing at more than 40 festivals worldwide in 2014 , beginning at the Coachella Festival in April .
The duo is one of the most successful hip-hop groups of all time , having received six Grammy Awards .
Between six studio albums and a greatest hits release , Outkast has sold over 25 million records .
Meanwhile , they have garnered widespread critical acclaim , with publications such as Rolling Stone and Pitchfork Media listing albums such as Aquemini and Stankonia among the best of their era .