Overexposed is the fourth studio album by the American band Maroon 5 , released on June 20 , 2012 , by A&M Octone Records .
The album was recorded between 2011 and 2012 and was driven after the moderate success of their third album , Hands All Over -LRB- 2010 -RRB- , and later by the enormous success of the re-released edition , which was promoted by the single `` Moves Like Jagger '' , recorded as a collaboration with Christina Aguilera .
It is the band 's only album not to feature keyboardist , rhythm guitarist and background vocalist , Jesse Carmichael , who took a temporary break from performing with the group to focus on his studies back then , but eventually returned to Maroon 5 in 2014 .
The band worked with different producers , such as Max Martin , who serves as the album 's executive producer , Ryan Tedder , Shellback and Benny Blanco .
The band 's guitarist and Levine 's usual co-writer James Valentine only has four credits on the album .
The accompanying artwork , created by LA artist Young & Sick , is a colorful collage of illustrations seemingly inspired by the likes of Picasso and a range of modern cartoonists .
Its title is a smirking allusion to Levine 's ubiquity , while its sound is a reflection of how the group wishes to retain the large audience they won once again with `` Moves Like Jagger '' .
The album 's lead single `` Payphone '' , featuring rapper Wiz Khalifa , produced by Shellback and Benny Blanco , was released and performed on The Voice on April 16 , 2012 .
The song was a success , reaching number two on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , as well as on the ARIA Charts , while it topped the UK Singles Chart , Canadian Hot 100 and Italian Singles Chart .
The second single , `` One More Night '' , was released on June 19 , 2012 .
The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 for nine weeks , becoming their longest Hot 100 reign .
All four singles released from Overexposed have reached the Hot 100 top-ten , including the last two of them : `` Daylight '' and `` Love Somebody '' .
The album received a mixed reception from music critics .
Some praised the album , calling it their strongest effort , but others criticized the direction the band decided to take , calling it a failed attempt to go mainstream .
Additionally , critics and fans alike perceived the album as overly focused on Levine .
It debuted at number 2 on the UK Albums Chart , selling 38,000 copies , and on the US Billboard 200 chart , selling 222,000 copies .
According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry -LRB- IFPI -RRB- , Overexposed was the 10th global best-selling album of 2012 with sales of 2.2 million copies , and sold approximately 3 million copies due to 2013 .
To promote the album , the band started the Overexposed Tour , which lasted from 2012 to 2014 .