Oz the Great and Powerful -LRB- working title Brick -RRB- is a 2013 American fantasy adventure film directed by Sam Raimi and produced by Joe Roth , from a screenplay written by David Lindsay-Abaire and Mitchell Kapner .
The film stars James Franco as the titular character , Mila Kunis , Rachel Weisz , and Michelle Williams with Zach Braff , Bill Cobbs , Joey King , and Tony Cox in supporting roles .
Based on L. Frank Baum 's Oz novels and set 20 years before the events of the original novel , Oz the Great and Powerful is a spiritual prequel to the 1939 Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film , The Wizard of Oz .
The film tells the story of Oscar Diggs , a deceptive magician who arrives in the Land of Oz and encounters three witches : Theodora , Evanora , and Glinda .
Oscar is then enlisted to restore order in Oz , while struggling to resolve conflicts with the witches and himself .
Kapner began developing an origin story for the Wizard of Oz after a lifelong interest of wanting to create one for the character .
Walt Disney Pictures commissioned the film 's production in 2009 , with Joe Roth as producer and Grant Curtis , Joshua Donen , Philip Steuer , and Palak Patel serving as executive producers .
Raimi was hired to direct the following year .
After Robert Downey Jr. and Johnny Depp declined the titular role , Franco was cast in February 2011 , with principal photography commencing five months later .
Danny Elfman composed the film 's score .
Oz the Great and Powerful premiered at the El Capitan Theatre on February 14 , 2013 , and with general theatrical release on March 8 , 2013 , through the Disney Digital 3-D , RealD 3D and IMAX 3D formats , as well as in conventional theaters .
It grossed over $ 493 million worldwide against a $ 215 million budget and is the thirteenth highest-grossing film of 2013 .
The film won the Phoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Live Action Family Film .
Kunis , for her portrayal as the Wicked Witch of the West , won the MTV Movie Award for Best Villain .