The Pakistan Movement or Tehrik-e-Pakistan -LRB- -LSB- -- -RRB- was a religious political movement in the 1940s that aimed for and succeeded in the creation of Pakistan from the Muslim-majority areas of British Indian Empire .
The movement progressed within India alongside the Indian independence movement , but the Pakistan Movement sought to establish a new nation-state that protected the religious identity and political interests of Muslims in South Asia .
The first organised political movements were in Aligarh where another literary movement was led by Sir Syed Ahmad Khan that built the genesis of the Pakistan movement .
An educational convention held in 1906 with joint efforts of Syed Ahmad Khan and Vikar-ul-Haq , the Muslim reformers took the movement to the political stage in the form of establishing the mainstream and then newly formed All-India Muslim League -LRB- AIML -RRB- , with prominent moderate leaders seeking to protect the basic rights of Muslims in the British Raj .
During the initial stages of the movement , it adopted the vision of philosopher Iqbal after addressing at the convention of the AIML 's annual session .
Muhammad Ali Jinnah 's constitutional struggle further helped gaining public support for the movement in the four provinces .
Urdu poets such as Iqbal and Faiz used literature , poetry and speech as a powerful tool for political awareness .
Feminists such as Sheila Pant and Fatima Jinnah championed the emancipation of Pakistan 's women and their participation in national politics .
The Pakistan Movement was led by a large and diversified group of people whose struggle ultimately resulted in the British Empire announcing the Indian Independence Act 1947 , which created the independent dominions of India and Pakistan .
The Pakistan Movement was the result of a series of social , political , and intellectual transformations in Pakistani society , government , and ways of thinking .
Efforts and struggles of the Founding Fathers resulted in the creation of the democratic and independent government .
In the following years , another nationally -- minded subset went on to established a strong government , followed by the military intervention in 1958 .
Grievousness and unbalanced economic distribution caused an upheaval which led East Pakistan to declare independence as the People 's Republic of Bangladesh in 1971 .
After a strong concessions and consents reached in 1973 , the new Constitution established a relatively strong government , institutions , national courts , a legislature that represented both states in the Senate and population in the National Assembly .
Pakistan 's phase shift to republicanism , and the gradually increasing democracy , caused an upheaval of traditional social hierarchy and gave birth to the ethic that has formed a core of political values in Pakistan .