Paramore is the self-titled fourth studio album by American rock band Paramore .
It was released on April 5 , 2013 , through Fueled by Ramen as a follow-up to Brand New Eyes -LRB- 2009 -RRB- .
It is their first full-length album released after the departure of co-founders Josh and Zac Farro in 2010 .
Recorded between April and November 1 , 2012 , the album was described by the band as being a `` statement '' and a reintroduction of the band to the world and to themselves .
It is the only album without Zac Farro on drums , and the final album recorded with bassist Jeremy Davis before he left the band in 2015 .
The album was produced by Justin Meldal-Johnsen , with lead guitarist Taylor York co-producing on four tracks .
In contrast to band 's previous work , the production of Paramore contains the band 's experimentation with new musical genres , such as new wave and funk rock , and features three acoustic interludes .
Paramore received acclaim from music critics , who praised the band 's maturity and experimentation in terms of musicianship as well as Williams ' vocals and overall presence on the album .
Several publications included the album in their year-end lists , including The A.V. Club and The Guardian .
Paramore was a commercial success , debuting at number one on the US Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 106,000 copies .
The album also topped the charts in Argentina , Australia , Brazil , Ireland , and New Zealand , where it became their first album to reach the summit .
It also became their second chart topper in the United Kingdom .
In March 2016 , Paramore was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- , for sales exceeding 1,000,000 .
The group followed the record release with The Self-Titled Tour in promotion , with European , North American , Asian , Latin American , and Oceania legs announced .
In 2014 , Fall Out Boy and Paramore co-headlined Monumentour .
A deluxe edition of the album was released on November 24 , 2014 .
Four singles were released from the album : `` Now '' , `` Still Into You '' , `` Daydreaming '' , and the Grammy-winning song `` Ai n't It Fun '' .
`` Still Into You '' and `` Ai n't It Fun '' have reached top ten positions on various charts in the United States and have been certified double platinum by the RIAA , making Paramore the first of the band 's albums to have produced more than one double platinum single .