Peter Paul Cetera -LRB- -LSB- səˈtɛrə -RSB- ; born September 13 , 1944 -RRB- is an American singer , songwriter , and bassist best known for being an original member of the rock band Chicago -LRB- 1967 -- 1985 -RRB- , before launching a successful solo career .
His career as a recording artist encompasses seventeen albums with Chicago and eight solo albums .
With `` If You Leave Me Now , '' a song written and sung by Cetera on the group 's tenth album , Chicago garnered its first Grammy Award .
It was also the group 's first number one single .
As a solo artist , Cetera has scored six Top 40 singles , including two that reached number one on -LSB- -LSB- Billboard Hot 100 | Billboard '' 's Hot 100 -RSB- -RSB- chart in 1986 , `` Glory of Love '' and `` The Next Time I Fall . ''
`` Glory of Love , '' the theme song from the film , The Karate Kid Part II '' , was co-written by Cetera , David Foster and Diane Nini , and was nominated for both an Academy Award and a Golden Globe Award for best original song from a motion picture .
In 1987 he received an ASCAP award for `` Glory of Love '' in the category , `` Most Performed Songs from Motion Pictures . ''
His performance on `` Glory of Love '' was nominated for a Grammy Award for best pop male vocal .
That same year Cetera and Amy Grant , who duetted on `` The Next Time I Fall , '' were nominated for a Grammy Award for best vocal performance by a pop duo or group .
Besides David Foster and Amy Grant , Cetera has collaborated throughout his career with other nationally known and internationally known recording artists from various genres of music including : The Beach Boys , Billy Joel , Karen Carpenter , Paul Anka , Agnetha Fältskog , Richard Sterban , Bonnie Raitt , Madonna , David Gilmour , Az Yet , Cher , Chaka Khan , Crystal Bernard , Ronna Reeves , and Alison Krauss .
His songs have been featured in soundtracks for movies and television .
In 2014 , the first album by the group Chicago , Chicago Transit Authority -LRB- Columbia , 1969 -RRB- , with Cetera on bass and vocals , was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame .
Cetera was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Chicago in April 2016 , and Cetera , Robert Lamm , and James Pankow are among the 2017 Songwriters Hall of Fame inductees for their songwriting efforts as members of the group .