Peyton Williams Manning -LRB- born March 24 , 1976 -RRB- is a former American football quarterback who played 18 seasons in the National Football League -LRB- NFL -RRB- , primarily with the Indianapolis Colts .
Considered to be one of the greatest quarterbacks of all time , he spent 14 seasons with the Colts and was a member of the Denver Broncos in his last four seasons .
Manning played college football for the University of Tennessee , leading the Tennessee Volunteers to the 1997 SEC Championship in his senior season .
He is the second son of former NFL quarterback Archie Manning and older brother of New York Giants quarterback Eli Manning .
Manning was selected by the Indianapolis Colts as the first overall pick in the 1998 NFL Draft .
From 1998 to 2010 , he improved the fortunes of the struggling Colts franchise and helped transform them into playoff contenders .
During his tenure as starting quarterback , Manning led the team to eight division championships , two AFC championships , and one Super Bowl title , the franchise 's first in over three decades , as well as their first since relocating to Indianapolis .
After undergoing neck surgery that forced him to miss the entire 2011 season , Manning was released by the Colts and signed with the Denver Broncos .
Serving as the team 's starting quarterback from 2012 to 2015 , he contributed to the Broncos reaching the top of their division each year and his playing career concluded with a victory in Super Bowl 50 .
Manning holds many NFL records , including passing yards -LRB- 71,940 -RRB- , touchdown passes -LRB- 539 -RRB- , AP MVP awards -LRB- 5 -RRB- , Pro Bowl appearances -LRB- 14 -RRB- , and 4,000-yard passing seasons -LRB- 14 -RRB- .
A two-time Super Bowl winner and the most valuable player of Super Bowl XLI , Manning is also the only quarterback to start the Super Bowl for two different franchises more than once each and the only starting quarterback to win a Super Bowl with two different franchises .
At 39 years of age , Manning is the oldest quarterback to start in and win a Super Bowl .
Manning is also the only quarterback in NFL history to make the Super Bowl four times with four different head coaches -LRB- Dungy , Caldwell , Fox , and Kubiak -RRB- .
During a 2009 Monday Night Football game , Manning received the nickname `` The Sheriff '' from color commentator Jon Gruden due to his tendency to audible prior to the snap , and he was one of the most recognizable and parodied players in the NFL .
Teams led by Manning typically utilized the hurry-up offense in place of the standard huddle .