The Philippines -LRB- -LSB- ˈfɪlᵻpiːnz -RSB- Pilipinas -LSB- ˌpɪlɪˈpinɐs -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Republic of the Philippines -LRB- -LSB- Republika ng Pilipinas , links = no -RSB- -RRB- , is a sovereign island country in Southeast Asia situated in the western Pacific Ocean .
It consists of about 7,641 islands that are categorized broadly under three main geographical divisions from north to south : Luzon , Visayas , and Mindanao .
The capital city of the Philippines is Manila and the most populous city is Quezon City , both part of Metro Manila .
Bounded by the South China Sea on the west , the Philippine Sea on the east and the Celebes Sea on the southwest , the Philippines shares maritime borders with Taiwan to the north , Vietnam to the west , Palau to the east and Malaysia and Indonesia to the south .
The Philippines ' location on the Pacific Ring of Fire and close to the equator makes the Philippines prone to earthquakes and typhoons , but also endows it with abundant natural resources and some of the world 's greatest biodiversity .
The Philippines has an area of 300000 km2 , and a population of approximately 100 million .
It is the eighth-most populated country in Asia and the 12th most populated country in the world .
, approximately 10 million additional Filipinos lived overseas , comprising one of the world 's largest diasporas .
Multiple ethnicities and cultures are found throughout the islands .
In prehistoric times , Negritos were some of the archipelago 's earliest inhabitants .
They were followed by successive waves of Austronesian peoples .
Exchanges with Chinese , Malay , Indian , and Islamic nations occurred .
Then , various competing maritime states were established under the rule of Datus , Rajahs , Sultans or Lakans .
The arrival of Ferdinand Magellan in Homonhon , Eastern Samar in 1521 marked the beginning of Hispanic colonization .
In 1543 , Spanish explorer Ruy López de Villalobos named the archipelago Las Islas Filipinas in honor of Philip II of Spain .
With the arrival of Miguel López de Legazpi from Mexico City , in 1565 , the first Hispanic settlement in the archipelago was established .
The Philippines became part of the Spanish Empire for more than 300 years .
This resulted in Roman Catholicism becoming the dominant religion .
During this time , Manila became the western hub of the trans-Pacific trade connecting Asia with Acapulco in the Americas using Manila galleons .
As the 19th century gave way to the 20th , there followed in quick succession the Philippine Revolution , which spawned the short-lived First Philippine Republic , followed by the bloody Philippine -- American War of conquest by US military force .
Aside from the period of Japanese occupation , the United States retained sovereignty over the islands until after World War II , when the Philippines was recognized as an independent nation .
Since then , the Philippines has often had a tumultuous experience with democracy , which included the overthrow of a dictatorship by a non-violent revolution .
It is a founding member of the United Nations , World Trade Organization , Association of Southeast Asian Nations , the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum , and the East Asia Summit .
It also hosts the headquarters of the Asian Development Bank .
The Philippines is considered to be an emerging market and a newly industrialized country , which has an economy transitioning from being one based on agriculture to one based more on services and manufacturing .
It is one of the only two predominantly Christian nations in Southeast Asia , the other being East Timor .