The Philadelphia Museum of Art is an art museum originally chartered in 1876 for the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia .
The main museum building was completed in 1928 on Fairmount , a hill located at the northwest end of the Benjamin Franklin Parkway at Eakins Oval .
The museum administers collections containing over 240,000 objects including major holdings of European , American and Asian origin .
The various classes of artwork include sculpture , paintings , prints , drawings , photographs , armor and decorative arts .
The attendance figure for the museum was 751,797 in 2015 , an increase of 17 % from the prior year , ranking it among the top one hundred most-visited art museums in the world .
The museum is also one of the largest art museums in the world based on gallery space .
The Philadelphia Museum of Art administers several annexes including the Rodin Museum , also located on the Benjamin Franklin Parkway , and the Ruth and Raymond G. Perelman Building , which is located across the street just north of the main building .
The Perelman Building , which opened in 2007 , houses more than 150,000 prints , drawings and photographs , along with 30,000 costume and textile pieces , and over 1,000 modern and contemporary design objects including furniture , ceramics and glasswork .
The museum also administers the historic colonial-era houses of Mount Pleasant and Cedar Grove , both located in Fairmount Park .
The main museum building and its annexes are owned by the City of Philadelphia and administered by a registered nonprofit corporation .
, the standard adult admission price is $ 20 which allows entrance to the main building and all annexes for two consecutive days .
The museum is closed on Mondays except on some holidays .
A special `` Pay What You Wish '' program is in effect on the first Sunday of each month from 10:00 a.m. -- 5:00 p.m. and every Wednesday evening from 5:00 -- 8:45 p.m. when visitors are requested to '' ... support us with whatever amount you wish . ''
Several special exhibitions are held in the museum every year , including touring exhibitions arranged with other museums in the United States and abroad .
Special exhibitions may have an extra charge for entrance .