Alecia Beth Moore -LRB- born September 8 , 1979 -RRB- , known professionally as Pink -LRB- frequently stylized as -RRB- , is an American singer , songwriter , dancer , and actress .
She was signed to her first record label with original R&B girl group Choice in 1995 .
The label , LaFace Records saw potential in only Pink , offering her a solo deal .
Choice disbanded in 1998 .
Pink rose as an artist with her debut solo album , Ca n't Take Me Home -LRB- 2000 -RRB- .
It was certified double-platinum in the United States and spawned two Billboard Hot 100 top-ten hits : `` There You Go '' and `` Most Girls '' .
She gained further recognition with the Moulin Rouge !
soundtrack `` Lady Marmalade '' , which gave Pink her first Grammy Award as well as her first number-one single on the Billboard Hot 100 .
Pink took control in early 2001 insisting she wanted to work with her childhood hero , Linda Perry .
Pink took more artistic control and pursued a pop rock direction for her second album , Missundaztood -LRB- 2001 -RRB- .
It sold more than 15 million copies worldwide and yielded three United States top-ten singles , `` Get the Party Started '' , `` Do n't Let Me Get Me '' , and `` Just Like a Pill '' .
Pink 's third album , Try This -LRB- 2003 -RRB- , generated considerably lower sales , but earned her the Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance .
Pink revived her popularity with her fourth and fifth studio albums , I 'm Not Dead -LRB- 2006 -RRB- and Funhouse -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , with the latter containing her second United States number-one hit , `` So What '' .
Pink concluded the first decade of her career with the compilation album Greatest Hits ... So Far !!
-LRB- 2010 -RRB- , which featured `` Fuckin ' Perfect '' and the chart-topping single `` Raise Your Glass '' .
Her sixth studio album , The Truth About Love -LRB- 2012 -RRB- , debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and spawned the top-ten singles `` Blow Me -LRB- One Last Kiss -RRB- '' , `` Try '' , and `` Just Give Me a Reason '' , with the latter becoming her fourth United States number-one single .
In 2014 Pink recorded a collaborative album , Rose Ave. , with Canadian musician Dallas Green under a folk music duo named You + Me .
Recognized for her strong signature vocals and acrobatic performances , Pink has sold over 47 million albums worldwide , including over 16 million albums in the United States .
Her career accolades include three Grammy Awards , a Brit Award , a Daytime Emmy Award and six MTV Video Music Awards .
In 2009 , Billboard named Pink the Pop Songs Artist of the Decade .
Pink was also the second most-played female solo artist in the United Kingdom during the 2000s decade , behind Madonna .
VH1 ranked her number 10 on their list of the 100 Greatest Women in Music , while Billboard awarded her the Woman of the Year award in 2013 .
At the 63rd annual BMI Pop Awards , she received the BMI President 's Award for `` her outstanding achievement in songwriting and global impact on pop culture and the entertainment industry . ''