PlayStation 4 -LRB- PS4 -RRB- is a line of home video game consoles developed by Sony Interactive Entertainment .
Announced as the successor to the PlayStation 3 during a press conference on February 20 , 2013 , it was launched on November 15 in North America , November 29 in Europe , South America and Australia ; and February 22 , 2014 , in Japan .
It competes with Nintendo 's Wii U and Microsoft 's Xbox One , as part of the eighth generation of video game consoles .
Moving away from the more complex Cell microarchitecture of its predecessor , the console features an AMD Accelerated Processing Unit -LRB- APU -RRB- built upon the x86-64 architecture , which can theoretically peak at 1.84 teraflops ; AMD stated that it was the `` most powerful '' APU it had developed to date .
The PlayStation 4 places an increased emphasis on social interaction and integration with other devices and services , including the ability to play games off-console on PlayStation Vita and other supported devices -LRB- `` Remote Play '' -RRB- , the ability to stream gameplay online or to friends , with them controlling gameplay remotely -LRB- `` Share Play '' -RRB- .
The console 's controller was also redesigned and improved over the PlayStation 3 , with improved buttons and analog sticks , and an integrated touchpad among other changes .
The console also supports HDR10 high-dynamic-range color and playback of 4K multimedia .
Reception to the original PlayStation 4 model was positive , with critics praising Sony for acknowledging its consumers ' needs , embrace of independent game development , and for not imposing restrictive digital rights management schemes that Microsoft had previously announced for Xbox One prior to its release .
Critics and third-party studios also praised the capabilities of the PlayStation 4 in comparison to its competitors ; developers described the performance difference between the console and Xbox One as being `` significant '' and `` obvious '' .
Heightened demand also helped Sony top global console sales .
By the end of 2016 , more than 53 million consoles have been sold worldwide , with more than 57 million shipped .
On September 7 , 2016 , Sony unveiled two hardware revisions of PlayStation 4 ; a slim build of the console , and a `` Pro '' version with an upgraded GPU and higher CPU clock rate to support 4K gameplay on supported titles .