Pocahontas -LRB- born Matoaka , known as Amonute , 1596 -- 1617 -RRB- was a Native American woman notable for her association with the colonial settlement at Jamestown , Virginia .
Pocahontas was the daughter of Powhatan , the paramount chief of a network of tributary tribal nations in the Tsenacommacah , encompassing the Tidewater region of Virginia .
In a well-known historical anecdote , she is said to have saved the life of a captive of the Native Americans , the Englishman John Smith , in 1607 by placing her head upon his own when her father raised his war club to execute him .
Some historians have suggested that this story , as told by Smith , is untrue .
Pocahontas was captured by the English during Anglo-Indian hostilities in 1613 , and held for ransom .
During her captivity , she converted to Christianity and took the name Rebecca .
When the opportunity arose for her to return to her people , she chose to remain with the English .
In April 1614 , she married tobacco planter John Rolfe , and in January 1615 , bore their son , Thomas Rolfe .
In 1616 , the Rolfes traveled to London .
Pocahontas was presented to English society as an example of the `` civilized savage '' in hopes of stimulating investment in the Jamestown settlement .
She became something of a celebrity , was elegantly fêted , and attended a masque at Whitehall Palace .
In 1617 , the Rolfes set sail for Virginia , but Pocahontas died at Gravesend of unknown causes .
She was buried in a church in Gravesend in the United Kingdom , but the exact location of her grave is unknown .
Numerous places , landmarks , and products in the United States have been named after Pocahontas .
Her story has been romanticized over the years , and she is a subject of art , literature , and film .
Many famous people have claimed to be among her descendants through her son Thomas , including members of the First Families of Virginia , First Lady Edith Wilson , American Western actor Glenn Strange , and astronomer Percival Lowell .