Prague -LRB- -LSB- ˈprɑːɡ -RSB- Praha , -LSB- ˈpraɦa -RSB- , Prag -RRB- is the capital and largest city of the Czech Republic .
It is the 14th largest city in the European Union .
It is also the historical capital of Bohemia .
Situated in the north-west of the country on the Vltava river , the city is home to about 1.26 million people , while its larger urban zone is estimated to have a population of nearly 2 million .
The city has a temperate climate , with warm summers and chilly winters .
Prague has been a political , cultural , and economic centre of central Europe with waxing and waning fortunes during its history .
Founded during the Romanesque and flourishing by the Gothic , Renaissance and Baroque eras , Prague was the capital of the kingdom of Bohemia and the main residence of several Holy Roman Emperors , most notably of Charles IV -LRB- r. 1346 -- 1378 -RRB- .
It was an important city to the Habsburg Monarchy and its Austro-Hungarian Empire .
The city played major roles in the Bohemian and Protestant Reformation , the Thirty Years ' War , and in 20th-century history as the capital of Czechoslovakia , during both World Wars and the post-war Communist era .
Prague is home to a number of famous cultural attractions , many of which survived the violence and destruction of 20th-century Europe .
Main attractions include the Prague Castle , the Charles Bridge , Old Town Square with the Prague astronomical clock , the Jewish Quarter , Petřín hill and Vyšehrad .
Since 1992 , the extensive historic centre of Prague has been included in the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites .
The city has more than ten major museums , along with numerous theatres , galleries , cinemas , and other historical exhibits .
An extensive modern public transportation system connects the city .
Also , it is home to a wide range of public and private schools , including Charles University in Prague , the oldest university in Central Europe .
Prague is classified as an `` Alpha - '' global city according to GaWC studies .
Prague ranked sixth in the Tripadvisor world list of best destinations in 2016 .
Its rich history makes it a popular tourist destination , and the city receives more than 6.4 million international visitors annually , .
Prague is the fifth most visited European city after London , Paris , Istanbul and Rome .