Precious : Base on Nol by Saf -LRB- Based on the Novel `` Push '' by Sapphire -RRB- , or simply Precious , is a 2009 American drama film , directed and co-produced by Lee Daniels .
Precious is an adaptation by Geoffrey S. Fletcher of the 1996 novel Push by Sapphire .
The film stars Gabourey Sidibe , Mo'Nique , Paula Patton , and Mariah Carey .
This film marked the acting debut of Sidibe .
The film , then without a distributor , premiered to acclaim at both the 2009 Sundance Film Festival and the 2009 Cannes Film Festival , under its original title of Push : Based on the Novel by Sapphire .
At Sundance , it won the Audience Award and the Grand Jury Prize for best drama , as well as a Special Jury Prize for supporting actress Mo'Nique .
After Precious '' ' screening at Sundance in January 2009 , Tyler Perry announced that he and Oprah Winfrey would be providing promotional assistance to the film , which was released through Lionsgate Entertainment .
Precious won the People 's Choice Award at the Toronto International Film Festival in September .
The film 's title was changed from Push to Precious : Based on the Novel `` Push '' by Sapphire , to avoid confusion with the 2009 action film Push .
Precious was also an official selection at the 62nd Cannes Film Festival -LRB- particularly the un certain regard section -RRB- .
Lionsgate gave the film a limited release in North America on November 6 , 2009 -LRB- the release was expanded on November 20 -RRB- .
Precious received largely positive reviews from critics ; the acting , the story , and its message were generally praised .
In the film 's opening weekend in limited release , it grossed $ 1.8 million , putting it in 12th place at the box office .
As of February 2010 , the film had grossed over $ 47 million domestically , ranking no. 65 for 2009 , recouping its $ 10 million budget , and making it a box office success.Precious '' received six Academy Award nominations , including one for Best Picture , at the 82nd Academy Awards .
Geoffrey Fletcher won for Best Adapted Screenplay .
Mo'Nique won the award for Best Supporting Actress , for which she received a standing ovation at the ceremony , along with numerous other accolades .