The President of the Russian Federation -LRB- -LSB- Президент Российской Федерации , r = Prezident Rossiiskoi Federatsii -RSB- -RRB- is the elected head of state , Supreme Commander-in-Chief and holder of the highest office within the Russian Federation .
The current President of Russia is Vladimir Putin .
In 1991 , the office was briefly known as the President of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic until 25 December 1991 .
According to the 1978 Russian Constitution , the President of Russia was head of the executive branch and headed the Council of Ministers of Russia .
According to the current 1993 Constitution of Russia , the President of Russia is not a part of the Government of Russia , which exercises executive power .
In all cases where the President of the Russian Federation is unable to fulfill his duties , they shall be temporarily delegated to the Prime Minister , who becomes Acting President of Russia .
The Chairman of the Federation Council is the third important position after the President and the Prime Minister .
In the case of incapacity of both the President and Prime Minister , the chairman of the upper house of parliament becomes acting head of state .
The power includes execution of federal law , alongside the responsibility of appointing federal ministers , diplomatic , regulatory and judicial officers , and concluding treaties with foreign powers with the advice and consent of the State Duma and the Federation Council .
The president is further empowered to grant federal pardons and reprieves , and to convene and adjourn the Federal Assembly under extraordinary circumstances .
The president also directs the foreign and domestic policy of the Russian Federation .
The president is elected directly through a popular vote to a six-year term .
The law prohibits anyone from ever being elected to the presidency for a third consecutive term .
In all , 3 individuals have served 4 presidencies spanning 6 full terms .
On May 7 , 2012 , Vladimir Putin became the 4th and current president .