Priyanka Chopra -LRB- -LSB- prɪˈjaːŋkaː ˈtʃoːpɽaː -RSB- ; born 18 July 1982 -RRB- is an Indian actress , singer , film producer , philanthropist , and the winner of the Miss World 2000 pageant .
One of India 's highest-paid and most popular celebrities , Chopra has received numerous awards , including a National Film Award and five Filmfare Awards .
In 2016 , the Government of India honoured her with the Padma Shri , the fourth highest civilian award , and Time magazine named her one of the 100 most influential people in the world .
In 2017 , she has been honoured with Dadasaheb Phalke Award - India 's highest award in cinema , becoming the first actress to win in the category `` International Acclaimed Actress Award '' .
Although Chopra initially aspired to study aeronautical engineering , she accepted offers to join the Indian film industry , which came as a result of her pageant wins , making her Bollywood debut in The Hero -LRB- 2003 -RRB- .
She played the leading lady in the box-office hits Andaaz -LRB- 2003 -RRB- and Mujhse Shaadi Karogi -LRB- 2004 -RRB- , and earned praise for her breakout role in the 2004 thriller Aitraaz .
In 2006 , Chopra established herself as a leading actress of Indian cinema with starring roles in the top-grossing productions Krrish and Don .
Following a brief setback , she received critical acclaim for playing a troubled model in the drama Fashion -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , which won her the Filmfare and National Film Award for Best Actress .
Chopra subsequently gained wider recognition for portraying a range of characters in the films Kaminey -LRB- 2009 -RRB- , 7 Khoon Maaf -LRB- 2011 -RRB- , Barfi !
-LRB- 2012 -RRB- , Mary Kom -LRB- 2014 -RRB- , Dil Dhadakne Do -LRB- 2015 -RRB- and Bajirao Mastani -LRB- 2015 -RRB- , all of which garnered her several awards and nominations .
In 2015 , she began starring as Alex Parrish on the ABC thriller series Quantico , becoming the first South Asian to headline an American network series .
In addition to her acting career , Chopra is noted for her philanthropic work .
She has worked with UNICEF for the last ten years and was appointed as the national and global UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador for Child Rights in 2010 and 2016 respectively .
She promotes various causes such as environment , health and education , and women 's rights and is particularly vocal about gender equality and feminism .
Chopra 's off-screen life is the subject of substantial media coverage .
As a recording artist , she has released three singles .
She is also the founder of the production company Purple Pebble Pictures , which released the acclaimed Marathi comedy-drama Ventilator -LRB- 2016 -RRB- .