The Los Alamos Laboratory , also known as Project Y , was a secret laboratory established by the Manhattan Project and operated by the University of California during World War II .
Its mission was to design and build the first atomic bombs .
Robert Oppenheimer was its first director , from 1943 to December 1945 , when he was succeeded by Norris Bradbury .
For scientists freely to discuss their work while preserving security , the laboratory was located in a remote part of New Mexico .
The wartime laboratory occupied buildings that had once been part of the Los Alamos Ranch School .
The development effort initially concentrated on a gun-type fission weapon using plutonium called Thin Man .
In April 1944 , the Los Alamos Laboratory determined that the rate of spontaneous fission in plutonium bred in a nuclear reactor was too great due to the presence of plutonium-240 and would cause a predetonation , a nuclear chain reaction before the core was fully assembled .
Oppenheimer then reorganized the laboratory and orchestrated an all-out and ultimately successful effort on an alternative design proposed by John von Neumann , an implosion-type nuclear weapon , which was called Fat Man .
A variant of the gun-type design known as Little Boy was developed using uranium-235 .
Chemists at the Los Alamos Laboratory developed methods of purifying uranium and plutonium , the latter a metal that only existed in microscopic quantities when Project Y began .
Its metallurgists found that plutonium had unexpected properties , but were nonetheless able to cast it into metal spheres .
The laboratory built the Water Boiler , an aqueous homogeneous reactor , the third reactor in the world to become operational .
It also researched the Super , a hydrogen bomb that would use a fission bomb to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction in deuterium and tritium .
The Fat Man design was tested in the Trinity nuclear test in July 1945 .
Project Y personnel formed pit crews and assembly teams for the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and participated in the bombing as weaponeers and observers .
After the war ended , the laboratory supported the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll .
A new Z Division was created to control testing , stockpiling and bomb assembly activities , which were concentrated at Sandia Base .
The Los Alamos Laboratory became Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in 1947 .