Puerto Rico -LRB- Spanish for `` Rich Port '' -RRB- , officially the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico -LRB- Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico , `` Free Associated State of Puerto Rico '' -RRB- and briefly called Porto Rico , is an unincorporated territory of the United States located in the northeast Caribbean Sea .
It is an archipelago that includes the main island of Puerto Rico and a number of smaller ones such as Mona , Culebra , and Vieques .
The capital and most populous city is San Juan .
Its official languages are Spanish and English , though Spanish predominates .
The island 's population is approximately 3.4 million .
Puerto Rico 's rich history , tropical climate , diverse natural scenery , traditional cuisine , and attractive tax incentives make it a popular destination for travelers from around the world .
Originally populated by the indigenous Taíno people , the island was claimed in 1493 by Christopher Columbus for the Crown of Castile , and it later endured invasion attempts from the French , Dutch , and British .
Four centuries of Spanish colonial government transformed the island 's ethnic , cultural and physical landscapes primarily with waves of African slaves , and Canarian , and Andalusian settlers .
In the Spanish imperial imagination , Puerto Rico played a secondary , but strategic role when compared to wealthier colonies like Peru and Mexico .
Such a distant administrative control continued right up until the end of the 19th century helping to produce a distinctive creole Hispanic culture and language that combined elements from the Natives , Africans , and Iberian people .
In 1898 , following the Spanish -- American War , the United States appropriated Puerto Rico together with most former Spanish colonies under the terms of the Treaty of Paris .
Puerto Ricans are considered natural-born citizens of the United States .
However , Puerto Rico does not have a vote in the United States Congress , which governs the territory with full jurisdiction under the Puerto Rico Federal Relations Act of 1950 .
As a U.S. territory , American citizens residing on the island are disenfranchised at the national level and may not vote for president and vice president of the United States .
However , Congress approved a local constitution , allowing U.S. citizens on the territory to elect a governor .
A 2012 referendum showed a majority -LRB- 54 % of those who voted -RRB- disagreed with `` the present form of territorial status '' , with full statehood as the preferred option among those who voted for a change of status , although a significant number of people did not answer the second question from the referendum .
A fifth referendum will be held in June 2017 , and `` Statehood '' and `` Independence/Free Association '' were initially the only available options .
However , at the recommendation of the Department of Justice , a `` current territorial status '' option will be added .
In early 2017 , the Puerto Rican government-debt crisis posed serious problems for the government .
The outstanding bond debt had climbed to $ 70 billion at a time with 12.4 % unemployment .
The debt had been increasing during a decade long recession .
This was the second major financial crisis to affect the island after the Great Depression when the U.S. government , in 1935 , provided relief efforts through the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration .
On May 3 , 2017 , Puerto Rico 's financial oversight board in the U.S. District Court in Puerto Rico filed the debt restructuring petition which was made under Title III of PROMESA .