Pulmonary embolism -LRB- PE -RRB- is a blockage of an artery in the lungs by a substance that has traveled from elsewhere in the body through the bloodstream -LRB- embolism -RRB- .
Symptoms of a PE may include shortness of breath , chest pain particularly upon breathing in , and coughing up blood .
Symptoms of a blood clot in the leg may also be present such as a red , warm , swollen , and painful leg .
Signs of a PE include low blood oxygen levels , rapid breathing , rapid heart rate , and sometimes a mild fever .
Severe cases can lead to passing out , abnormally low blood pressure , and sudden death .
PE usually results from a blood clot in the leg that travels to the lung .
The risk of blood clots is increased by cancer , prolonged bed rest , smoking , stroke , certain genetic conditions , estrogen-based medication , pregnancy , obesity , and after some types of surgery .
A small proportion of cases are due to the embolization of air , fat , or amniotic fluid .
Diagnosis is based on signs and symptoms in combination with test results .
If the risk is low a blood test known as a D-dimer will rule out the condition .
Otherwise a CT pulmonary angiography , lung ventilation/perfusion scan , or ultrasound of the legs may confirm the diagnosis .
Together deep vein thrombosis and PE are known as venous thromboembolism -LRB- VTE -RRB- .
Efforts to prevent PE include beginning to move as soon as possible after surgery , lower leg exercises during periods of sitting , and the use of blood thinners after some types of surgery .
Treatment is typically with blood thinners such as heparin or warfarin .
Often these are recommended for six months or longer .
Severe cases may require thrombolysis using medication such as tissue plasminogen activator -LRB- tPA -RRB- , or may require surgery such as a pulmonary thrombectomy .
If blood thinners are not appropriate , a vena cava filter may be used .
Pulmonary emboli affect about 430,000 people each year in Europe .
In the United States between 300,000 and 600,000 cases occur each year , which results in between 50,000 and 200,000 deaths .
Rates are similar in males and females .
They become more common as people get older .