Rabies is a viral disease that causes inflammation of the brain in humans and other mammals .
Early symptoms can include fever and tingling at the site of exposure .
These symptoms are followed by one or more of the following symptoms : violent movements , uncontrolled excitement , fear of water , an inability to move parts of the body , confusion , and loss of consciousness .
Once symptoms appear , the result is nearly always death .
The time period between contracting the disease and the start of symptoms is usually one to three months ; however , this time period can vary from less than one week to more than one year .
The time is dependent on the distance the virus must travel to reach the central nervous system .
Rabies is caused by lyssaviruses , including the rabies virus and Australian bat lyssavirus .
Rabies is spread when an infected animal scratches or bites another animal or human .
Saliva from an infected animal can also transmit rabies if the saliva comes into contact with the eyes , mouth , or nose .
Globally , dogs are the most common animal involved .
More than 99 % of rabies cases in countries where dogs commonly have the disease are caused by dog bites .
In the Americas , bat bites are the most common source of rabies infections in humans , and less than 5 % of cases are from dogs .
Rodents are very rarely infected with rabies .
The rabies virus travels to the brain by following the peripheral nerves .
The disease can only be diagnosed after the start of symptoms .
Animal control and vaccination programs have decreased the risk of rabies from dogs in a number of regions of the world .
Immunizing people before they are exposed is recommended for those who are at high risk .
The high-risk group includes people who work with bats or who spend prolonged periods in areas of the world where rabies is common .
In people who have been exposed to rabies , the rabies vaccine and sometimes rabies immunoglobulin are effective in preventing the disease if the person receives the treatment before the start of rabies symptoms .
Washing bites and scratches for 15 minutes with soap and water , povidone iodine , or detergent may reduce the number of viral particles and may be somewhat effective at preventing transmission .
Only five people have survived a rabies infection after showing symptoms , and this was with extensive treatment known as the Milwaukee protocol .
Rabies caused about 17,400 deaths worldwide in 2015 .
More than 95 % of human deaths caused by rabies occur in Africa and Asia .
About 40 % of deaths occur in children under the age of 15 .
Rabies is present in more than 150 countries and on all continents but Antarctica .
More than 3 billion people live in regions of the world where rabies occurs .
A number of countries , including Australia and Japan , as well as much of Western Europe , do not have rabies among dogs .
Many small island nations do not have rabies at all .
It is classified as a neglected tropical disease .