Rage Against the Machine -LRB- also known as RATM or simply Rage -RRB- is an American rock band from Los Angeles , California .
Formed in 1991 , the group consists of rapper and vocalist Zack de la Rocha , bassist and backing vocalist Tim Commerford , guitarist Tom Morello , and drummer Brad Wilk .
They draw inspiration from early heavy metal instrumentation , as well as hip hop acts such as Afrika Bambaataa , Public Enemy , the Beastie Boys , and Dutch crossover band Urban Dance Squad .
Rage Against the Machine is well known for the members ' leftist and revolutionary political views , which are expressed in many of the band 's songs .
As of 2010 , they had sold over 16 million records worldwide .
In 1992 , the band released its self-titled debut album , which became a commercial and critical success , leading to a slot in the 1993 Lollapalooza festival .
In 2003 , the album was ranked number 368 on Rolling Stones list of the 500 greatest albums of all time .
The band did not release a follow-up record until 1996 , with Evil Empire .
The band 's third album , The Battle of Los Angeles , followed in 1999 , and in 2003 , the album was ranked number 426 on the same list .
During their initial nine-year run , they became one of the most popular and influential bands in music history , according to music journalist Colin Devenish .
They were also ranked No. 33 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock .
The band had a large influence on the nu metal genre which came to prominence during the second half of the 1990s .
In 2000 , the band released the cover album Renegades .
The same year , growing tensions over the direction of the band prompted de la Rocha to quit , leading to the band 's breakup .
De la Rocha started a low-key solo career , while the rest of the band formed the rock supergroup Audioslave with Chris Cornell , then-former frontman of Soundgarden ; Audioslave recorded three albums before disbanding in 2007 .
The same year , Rage Against the Machine announced a reunion and performed together for the first time in seven years at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2007 .
Up until 2011 , the band continued to perform at more live venues and festivals around the world .
In 2016 , Morello , Commerford and Wilk formed a new band , Prophets of Rage , with Chuck D and B-Real .