Ramadan -LRB- -LSB- ˌræməˈdɑːn -RSB- رمضان , -LSB- ramaˈdˤaːn -RSB- ; In Arabic phonology , it can be -LSB- -LSB- rɑmɑˈdˤɑːn , ramadˤɑːn , ræmæˈdˤɑːn -RSB- -RSB- , depending on the region .
also romanized as Ramazan , Ramadhan , or Ramathan -RRB- is the ninth month of the Islamic calendar , and is observed by Muslims worldwide as a month of fasting -LRB- Sawm -RRB- to commemorate the first revelation of the Quran to Muhammad according to Islamic belief .
This annual observance is regarded as one of the Five Pillars of Islam .
The month lasts 29 -- 30 days based on the visual sightings of the crescent moon , according to numerous biographical accounts compiled in the hadiths .
The word Ramadan comes from the Arabic root ramiḍa or ar-ramaḍ , which means scorching heat or dryness .
Fasting is fardh -LRB- obligatory -RRB- for adult Muslims , except those who are suffering from an illness , travelling , are elderly , pregnant , breastfeeding , diabetic , chronically ill or going through menstrual bleeding .
Fasting the month of Ramadan was made obligatory -LRB- wājib -RRB- during the month of Sha ` ban , in the second year after the Muslims migrated from Mecca to Medina .
Fatwas have been issued declaring that Muslims who live in regions with a natural phenomenon such as the midnight sun or polar night should follow the timetable of Mecca , but the more commonly accepted opinion is that Muslims in those areas should follow the timetable of the closest country to them in which night can be distinguished from day .
While fasting from dawn until sunset , Muslims refrain from consuming food , drinking liquids , smoking , and engaging in sexual relations .
Muslims are also instructed to refrain from sinful behavior that may negate the reward of fasting , such as false speech -LRB- insulting , backbiting , cursing , lying , etc. -RRB- and fighting except in self-defense .
Food and drinks are served daily , before dawn and after sunset , referred to as Suhoor and Iftar respectively .
Spiritual rewards -LRB- thawab -RRB- for fasting are also believed to be multiplied within the month of Ramadan .
Fasting for Muslims during Ramadan typically includes the increased offering of salat -LRB- prayers -RRB- , recitation of the Quran and an increase of doing good deeds and charity .