Randal Keith Orton -LRB- born April 1 , 1980 -RRB- is an American professional wrestler and actor .
He is currently signed to WWE , where he performs on the SmackDown brand .
Orton is a 13-time world champion .
Orton has held the WWE Championship nine times -LRB- eighth reign was as WWE World Heavyweight Champion -RRB- and WWE 's World Heavyweight Championship four times , and was the final holder of the World Heavyweight Championship , which he unified with the WWE Championship to become the WWE World Heavyweight Champion .
Orton is a third-generation professional wrestler ; his grandfather Bob Orton , Sr. , his father `` Cowboy '' Bob Orton , and his uncle Barry Orton all competed in the professional wrestling business .
Before being promoted to the main World Wrestling Federation -LRB- WWF , now WWE -RRB- roster , Orton trained in and wrestled for Mid-Missouri Wrestling Association-Southern Illinois Conference Wrestling for a month .
He was then sent to Ohio Valley Wrestling -LRB- OVW -RRB- , where he held the OVW Hardcore Championship twice .
Orton became a member of the stable Evolution shortly after his WWE debut , which quickly led to an Intercontinental Championship reign , his first title with the company .
He also acquired the moniker `` The Legend Killer '' during a storyline where he began disrespecting and then physically attacking WWE Hall of Famers and wrestling veterans .
At age 24 , he became the youngest world champion in WWE history after he won the World Heavyweight Championship .
With this win , he departed from Evolution and a feud with his former stablemates began .
In 2006 , Orton joined forces with Edge in a tag team known as Rated-RKO .
Together , they held the World Tag Team Championship .
After Rated-RKO disbanded in mid-2007 , Orton gained two WWE Championship reigns in one night , when at 27 he became the youngest two-time WWE Champion .
He formed the group The Legacy with Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase in 2008 .
It disbanded in 2010 and Orton returned to singles competition .
From 2013 to 2015 , Orton was aligned with The Authority , who named him the `` face of the WWE '' .
In late 2016 he joined The Wyatt Family , winning the WWE SmackDown Tag Team Championship with stablemates Bray Wyatt and Luke Harper before turning on Wyatt in February 2017 .
Overall , Orton has won 16 total championships in WWE .
He is the winner of the 2013 Money in the Bank ladder match , both the 2009 and 2017 Royal Rumble matches , and has headlined multiple pay-per-view events for WWE , including WrestleMania XXV and WrestleMania XXX .