Laura Jeanne Reese Witherspoon -LRB- -LSB- ˈriːs_ˈwɪðərspuːn -RSB- born March 22 , 1976 -RRB- is an American actress , producer , and entrepreneur .
Born in New Orleans and raised in Tennessee , she began her career as a child actress , making her professional screen debut in The Man in the Moon -LRB- 1991 -RRB- , for which she was nominated for a Young Artist Award .
Following breakout roles in Desperate Choices : To Save My Child -LRB- 1992 -RRB- and Jack the Bear , she starred in the comedy-drama Pleasantville -LRB- 1998 -RRB- , for which she won the Young Hollywood Award for Breakthrough Performance .
Her leading role of Tracy Flick in Election -LRB- 1999 -RRB- was nominated for a Golden Globe Award .
Witherspoon 's breakthrough role was playing Elle Woods in the 2001 film Legally Blonde , for which she received her second Golden Globe nomination .
The following year , she starred in the romantic comedy Sweet Home Alabama , which emerged as her biggest live-action commercial success .
In 2005 , she portrayed June Carter in Walk the Line , which earned her the Academy Award , Golden Globe Award , BAFTA Award , Screen Actors Guild Award , and Critics Choice Award for Best Actress .
Other notable films of hers include Legally Blonde 2 : Red , White & Blonde -LRB- 2003 -RRB- , Monsters vs. Aliens -LRB- 2009 -RRB- , Water for Elephants -LRB- 2011 -RRB- , and Sing -LRB- 2016 -RRB- .
In 2014 , Witherspoon produced the thriller Gone Girl and received critical acclaim for portraying Cheryl Strayed in Wild , for which she earned her second Academy Award nomination for Best Actress and a fourth Golden Globe nomination .
In 2017 , she produced and starred in the HBO drama series Big Little Lies .
Witherspoon owns a production company , Pacific Standard , and she is actively involved in children 's and women 's advocacy organizations .
She serves on the board of the Children 's Defense Fund -LRB- CDF -RRB- and was named Global Ambassador of Avon Products in 2007 , serving as honorary chair of the charitable Avon Foundation .
She received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2010 .