Renaissance art is the painting , sculpture and decorative arts of that period of European history known as the Renaissance , emerging as a distinct style in Italy in about 1400 , in parallel with developments which occurred in philosophy , literature , music and science .
The Renaissance art , perceived as the noblest of ancient traditions , took as its foundation the art of Classical antiquity , but transformed that tradition by absorbing recent developments in the art of Northern Europe and by applying contemporary scientific knowledge .
Renaissance art , with Renaissance Humanist philosophy , spread throughout Europe , affecting both artists and their patrons with the development of new techniques and new artistic sensibilities .
Renaissance art marks the transition of Europe from the medieval period to the Early Modern age .
In many parts of Europe , Early Renaissance art was created in parallel with Late Medieval art .
The influences upon the development of Renaissance men and women in the early 15th century are those that also affected Philosophy , Literature , Architecture , Theology , Science , Government and other aspects of society .
The following list presents a summary , dealt with more fully in the main articles that are cited above .
Classical texts , lost to European scholars for centuries , became available .
These included Philosophy , Prose , Poetry , Drama , Science , a thesis on the Arts and Early Christian Theology .
Simultaneously , Europe gained access to advanced mathematics which had its provenance in the works of Islamic scholars .
The advent of movable type printing in the 15th century meant that ideas could be disseminated easily , and an increasing number of books were written for a broad public .
The establishment of the Medici Bank and the subsequent trade it generated brought unprecedented wealth to a single Italian city , Florence .
Cosimo de ' Medici set a new standard for patronage of the arts , not associated with the church or monarchy .
Humanist philosophy meant that man 's relationship with humanity , the universe and with God was no longer the exclusive province of the Church .
A revived interest in the Classics brought about the first archaeological study of Roman remains by the architect Brunelleschi and sculptor Donatello .
The revival of a style of architecture based on classical precedents inspired a corresponding classicism in painting and sculpture , which manifested itself as early as the 1420s in the paintings of Masaccio and Uccello .
The improvement of oil paint and developments in oil-painting technique by Dutch artists such as Jan van Eyck , Rogier van der Weyden and Hugo van der Goes led to its adoption in Italy from about 1475 and had ultimately lasting effects on painting practices , worldwide .
The serendipitous presence within the region of Florence in the early 15th century of certain individuals of artistic genius , most notably Masaccio , Brunelleschi , Ghiberti , Piero della Francesca , Donatello and Michelozzo formed an ethos out of which sprang the great masters of the High Renaissance , as well as supporting and encouraging many lesser artists to achieve work of extraordinary quality .
A similar heritage of artistic achievement occurred in Venice through the talented Bellini family , their influential inlaw Mantegna , Giorgione , Titian and Tintoretto .
The publication of two treatises by Leone Battista Alberti , De Pitura -LRB- On Painting -RRB- , 1435 , and De re aedificatoria -LRB- Ten Books on Architecture -RRB- , 1452 .