Renato Balestra -LRB- born May 3 , 1924 -- -RRB- is an Italian fashion designer .
Born in Trieste , Renato Balestra comes from a family of architects and engineers and after a childhood steeped in the Mid-European cultural environment of the area , he too began studying for a degree in civil engineering .
However , even from the earliest days of his youth , he dedicated his much of his time to artistic activities , including both painting and music , and devoted several hours a day to studying the piano .
He is still a passionate connoisseur of both classical music and opera .
It was not until the last year of his engineering studies , however , that he became involved in fashion , creating a design in response to a bet made among friends .
Without his knowledge , the result was sent to Milan and , to his great surprise , he was invited to participate in the creation of an haute couture collection .
It is fair to say that fashion chose Renato Balestra , rather than Renato Balestra choosing fashion .
The move from Milan to Rome was rapid and although still undecided on exactly what path to take , Renato Balestra was convinced that his future lay
in design .
For a number of years , he designed for the theatre , the cinema and , naturally , the fashion world until the success of the first Renato Balestra label collections convinced him to choose the latter option .
From Via Sistina , where the Balestra shop had its headquarters , he began his rise to international fame , developing and creating a variety of activities .
Today , Renato Balestra designs and markets approximately thirty different ranges that include haute couture and ready-to-wear collections , a complete line of men 's wear and a wide range of accessories .
His private clients include prestigious names from all over the world .
Renato Balestra has designed clothes for the Empress Farah Diba , the Queen of Thailand , the first ladies of the Philippines and Egypt , Saudi Arabian Princesses and for leading celebrities of the international jet-set , not forgetting , of course , famous actresses .
However Renato Balestra 's interests are not limited to fashion .
Eclectic in his tastes , he has also been involved in television , taking part a in Italian Saturday-evening T.V. programm `` Rosa Chic '' , and is the guest star in `` Chiambretti c ' è '' that is going on 3 nights a week on RAI 2 .
He has also entered the literary world ,
writing a book for the Rusconi Publishing House entitled : `` Alla Ricerca dello Stile Perduto '' -LRB- `` In Search of the Lost Style '' -RRB- .
A lover of the active life , he is especially fond of travel .
He feels that the best way to learn about life is to discover countries ,
cultures and peoples from all over the world , becoming acquainted with their ways of life , their philosophies , their 3 customs and their religions .
Throughout his career , Renato Balestra has been invited to present his Collections all over the world , with enormous
international success .
He has also been awarded prestigious prizes in recognition of his talent .
When in Beijing , he had the great honour of being awarded the title of Honorary Professor of the Fashion Academy .
Renato
Balestra has designed the costumes for various theatre operas , and has recently created the costumes for Rossini 's Cinderella for
Belgrade 's Opera Theatre , and the ones for Strauss 's `` Cavaliere della Rosa '' in occasion of the liric opening season of Teatro Verdi in Trieste .
In August 2008 , Mr. Balestra designed the costumes for the cast of the famous Musical : `` Cinderella '' .
It is a big collaboration with MB Productions .
The costumes , designed by Renato Balestra , are acclaimed by the critics and audience .
The same costumes were shown in December 2011with the new `` Cinderella '' Musical presented at the 5th Avenue Theatre in Seattle .
In February 2010 , the City of Parma invites Renato Balestra to present his Haute Couture collection and a retrospective of his creations in the Teatro Regio .
For the first time in its long and prestigious history , this world-famous Opera House host a fashion event .
The evening event is for a noble cause , to raise funds for disabled children in Haiti affected by the earthquake .
America Award of the Italy-USA Foundation in 2010 .
In April 2011 , Renato Balestra opened the exhibition `` FASHION IS CULTURE '' at the Italian Cultural Institute of Los Angeles .
The exhibition traces the milestones of his prestigious career through 150 drawings and sketches including some of its most important models of high fashion , Opera Theaters Costumes and uniforms for Alitalia , the Philippine Airlines , for Agip oils , for the Wagon lits and the Senate Ceremonial .
The Haute Couture of Renato Balestra has also been involved in a Charity Gala at the Los Angeles Millennium Biltmore Hotel , in favor of `` City of Hope '' a leading research , treatment and education center for cancer , diabetes and other life-threatening diseases located in Duarte , California .
Always on the side of the most important humanitarian initiatives , Renato Balestra has presented to Hollywood about 150 dresses from the `` Vintage '' collection to the recent Spring-Summer show , and some `` scenes '' were created specifically for the Unification of Italy 150 ° and a homage to the United States .
Some of the creations of Renato Balestra are today sold in America at the Neiman Marcus Store in Beverly Hills , Los Angeles .