Revolver is the seventh studio album by the English rock band the Beatles .
Released on 5 August 1966 , it was the Beatles ' final recording project before their retirement as live performers , and marked a progression on their 1965 release Rubber Soul in terms of the group 's readiness to experiment in the recording studio .
The album 's diverse sounds include tape loops and backwards recordings on the psychedelic `` Tomorrow Never Knows '' , a classical string octet on `` Eleanor Rigby '' , and Indian-music backing on `` Love You To '' .
The album was reduced to eleven songs by Capitol Records in North America , where three of its tracks instead appeared on the June 1966 release Yesterday and Today .
Revolver was the last Beatles album to be subjected to Capitol 's policy of altering the band 's intended running order and content .
The Beatles recorded the album following a three-month break from professional commitments at the start of 1966 , and during a period when London was feted as the era 's cultural capital .
The songs reflect the influence of psychedelic drugs such as LSD and the increasing sophistication of the Beatles ' lyrics to address themes including death and transcendence from material concerns .
With no thoughts of reproducing their new material in concert , the band made liberal use of studio techniques such as varispeeding , reversed tapes , close audio miking and automatic double tracking -LRB- ADT -RRB- , in addition to employing musical instrumentation outside of their standard live set-up .
Some of the changes in studio practice introduced by Revolver , particularly ADT , were soon adopted throughout the recording industry .
The sessions also produced a non-album single , `` Paperback Writer '' backed with `` Rain '' , for which the Beatles filmed their first on-location promotional films .
In the UK , Revolver fourteen tracks were released to radio stations throughout July 1966 , with the music signifying what author Ian MacDonald later described as `` a second pop revolution -- one which while galvanising their existing rivals and inspiring many new ones , left all of them far behind '' .
The album 's US release coincided with the Beatles ' final concert tour , which was marred by the controversy surrounding John Lennon 's remark that the band had become `` more popular than Jesus '' .
The record topped the UK Albums Chart for seven weeks and America 's Billboard Top LPs list for six weeks .
Together with the children 's novelty song `` Yellow Submarine '' , `` Eleanor Rigby '' became an international hit when issued as a double A-side single .
Revolvers cover artwork , designed by Klaus Voormann , won the 1967 Grammy Award for Best Album Cover , Graphic Arts .
The album was influential in advancing principles espoused by the 1960s counterculture and in inspiring the development of pop music into subgenres such as psychedelic rock , electronica , progressive rock and world music .
With the restoration of the three omitted tracks for its international CD release in 1987 , many music critics recognise Revolver as the Beatles ' best album , surpassing Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band .
The album was ranked first in Colin Larkin 's book All-Time Top 1000 Albums and third in Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time .
In 2013 , after the British Phonographic Industry had changed its sales award rules , Revolver was certified platinum in the UK .
The album has been certified 5 × platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America .