RMS Titanic -LRB- -LSB- taɪˈtænɪk -RSB- -RRB- was a British passenger liner that sank in the North Atlantic Ocean in the early morning of 15 April 1912 , after colliding with an iceberg during her maiden voyage from Southampton to New York City .
Of the estimated 2,224 passengers and crew aboard , more than 1,500 died , making it one of the deadliest commercial peacetime maritime disasters in modern history .
The largest ship afloat at the time it entered service , the RMS Titanic was the second of three s operated by the White Star Line , and was built by the Harland and Wolff shipyard in Belfast .
Thomas Andrews , her architect , died in the disaster .
Under the command of Edward Smith , who went down with the ship , Titanic carried some of the wealthiest people in the world , as well as hundreds of emigrants from Great Britain and Ireland , Scandinavia and elsewhere throughout Europe seeking a new life in North America .
The first-class accommodation was designed to be the pinnacle of comfort and luxury , with an on-board gymnasium , swimming pool , libraries , high-class restaurants and opulent cabins .
A high-power radiotelegraph transmitter was available for sending passenger `` marconigrams '' and for the ship 's operational use .
Although Titanic had advanced safety features such as watertight compartments and remotely activated watertight doors , there were not enough lifeboats to accommodate all of those aboard , due to outdated maritime safety regulations .
Titanic only carried enough lifeboats for 1,178 people -- slightly more than half of the number on board , and one third of her total capacity .
After leaving Southampton on 10 April 1912 , Titanic called at Cherbourg in France and Queenstown -LRB- now Cobh -RRB- in Ireland before heading west to New York .
On 14 April , four days into the crossing and about 375 mi south of Newfoundland , she hit an iceberg at 11:40 p.m. ship 's time .
The collision caused the ship 's hull plates to buckle inwards along her starboard -LRB- right -RRB- side and opened five of her sixteen watertight compartments to the sea ; she could only survive four flooding .
Meanwhile , passengers and some crew members were evacuated in lifeboats , many of which were launched only partially loaded .
A disproportionate number of men were left aboard because of a `` women and children first '' protocol for loading lifeboats .
At 2:20 a.m. , she broke apart and foundered -- with well over one thousand people still aboard .
Just under two hours after Titanic sank , the Cunard liner arrived at the scene , where she brought aboard an estimated 705 survivors .
The disaster was greeted with worldwide shock and outrage at the huge loss of life and the regulatory and operational failures that had led to it .
Public inquiries in Britain and the United States led to major improvements in maritime safety .
One of their most important legacies was the establishment in 1914 of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea -LRB- SOLAS -RRB- , which still governs maritime safety today .
Additionally , several new wireless regulations were passed around the world in an effort to learn from the many missteps in wireless communications -- which could have saved many more passengers .
The wreck of Titanic , first discovered over 70 years after the sinking , remains on the seabed , split in two and gradually disintegrating at a depth of 12415 ft. Since her discovery in 1985 , thousands of artefacts have been recovered and put on display at museums around the world .
Titanic has become one of the most famous ships in history ; her memory is kept alive by numerous works of popular culture , including books , folk songs , films , exhibits , and memorials .
Titanic is the second largest ocean liner wreck in the world , only beaten by her sister , the largest ever sunk .