Rogue is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics , commonly in association with the X-Men .
The character debuted in Avengers Annual # 10 -LRB- November 1981 -RRB- as a villain , but then soon after she joined the X-Men .
Rogue is part of a subspecies of humans called mutants , who are born with superhuman abilities .
Rogue has the involuntary ability to absorb and sometimes also remove the memories , physical strength , and superpowers of anyone she touches .
Therefore , Rogue considers her powers to be a curse .
For most of her life , she limited her physical contact with others , including her on-off love interest , Gambit .
However , after many years , Rogue finally gained full control over her mutant ability .
Hailing from the fictional Caldecott County , Mississippi , Rogue is the X-Men 's self-described southern belle .
A runaway , she was adopted by Mystique of the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants and grew up as a villain .
After Rogue permanently absorbs Ms. Marvel 's psyche and Kree powers , she reforms and turns to the X-Men , fearing for her sanity .
Rogue 's real name and early history were not revealed until nearly 20 years after her introduction .
Until the back story provided by Robert Rodi in the ongoing Rogue series , which began in September 2004 , Rogue 's background was only hinted at .
Her name was revealed as Anna Marie , although her surname is still unknown .
She has sometimes adopted the name Raven , which is the first name of her foster mother Mystique .
Rogue has been one of the most prominent members of the X-Men since the 1980s .
She was # 5 on IGN 's Top 25 X-Men list for 2006 , # 4 on their Top Ten X-Babes list for 2006 , # 3 on Marvel 's list of Top 10 Toughest Females for 2009 and was given title of # 1 X-Man on CBR 's Top 50 X-Men of All Time for 2008 .
She was ranked tenth in Comics Buyer 's Guide 's `` 100 Sexiest Women in Comics '' list .
Rogue has been featured in most of the X-Men animated series , and various video games .
In the X-Men film series , she is portrayed by Anna Paquin .
Her visual cue is often the white streak that runs through her hair .