The Romani -LRB- also spelled Romany ; -LSB- ˈroʊməni -RSB- , -LSB- ˈrɒ - -RSB- -RRB- , or Roma , are a traditionally nomadic ethnic group , living mostly in Europe and the Americas and originating from the northern regions of the Indian subcontinent ,
apparently from the region that is currently occupied by the Indian states of Rajasthan , Haryana , and Punjab .
The Romani are widely known among English-speaking people by the exonym `` Gypsies '' -LRB- or `` Gipsies '' -RRB- , which some people consider pejorative due to its connotations of illegality and irregularity .
They are a dispersed people , but their most concentrated populations are located in Europe , especially Central , Eastern and Southern Europe -LRB- including Turkey , Spain and Southern France -RRB- .
The Romani originated in Northern India and arrived in Mid-West Asia , and Europe soon thereafter , around 1,000 years ago ,
either separating from the Dom people or , at least , having a similar history .
Specifically , the ancestors of both the Romani and the Dom left North India sometime between the sixth and eleventh century .
Since the 19th century , some Romani have also migrated to the Americas .
There are an estimated one million Roma in the United States ; and 800,000 in Brazil , most of whose ancestors emigrated in the nineteenth century from eastern Europe .
Brazil also includes some Romani descended from people deported by the government of Portugal during the Inquisition in the colonial era .
In migrations since the late nineteenth century , Romani have also moved to other countries in South America and to Canada .
In February 2016 , during the International Roma Conference , the Indian Minister of External Affairs stated that the people of the Roma community were children of India .
The conference ended with a recommendation to the Government of India to recognize the Roma community spread across 30 countries as a part of the Indian diaspora .
The Romani language is divided into several dialects , which add up to an estimated number of speakers larger than two million .
The total number of Romani people is at least twice as large -LRB- several times as large according to high estimates -RRB- .
Many Romani are native speakers of the language current in their country of residence , or of mixed languages combining the two ; those varieties are sometimes called Para-Romani .