Ronald Ulysses `` Ron '' Swanson is a fictional character
portrayed by Nick Offerman from the situation comedy television series Parks and Recreation on NBC , created by Greg Daniels and Michael Schur .
In the series , Ron is the director of the Parks and Recreation department of fictional Pawnee , Indiana , and the immediate superior of series protagonist Leslie Knope -LRB- Amy Poehler -RRB- until Knope 's election to the Pawnee City Council at the end of Season 4 .
In demeanor , political philosophy and work ethic , Knope and Swanson are very nearly polar opposites : where Knope is sunny and outgoing , decidedly liberal and constantly working , Swanson is distant , and as a staunch libertarian , is a strong advocate for small government -- stating his belief that government should be privatized -- and therefore believes that the parks department should not even exist .
Ron , who has an extremely deadpan and masculine personality , actively works to make city hall less effective and despises interacting with the public .
He loves meat , woodworking , hunting , whisky , and breakfast foods .
He hates and fears his two ex-wives , both named Tammy , one of whom is played by Offerman 's real-life wife , Megan Mullally .
Ron claims not to be interested in the personal lives of those around him but actually cares a great deal about his colleagues , and has a particularly strong respect for Leslie .
Conceived by series creators Michael Schur and Greg Daniels , Ron has been a central character since the pilot episode of Parks and Recreation .
Offerman had some input into the character 's creation , and some aspects of Ron 's personality were inspired by the actor , like his affinity for woodworking and 16-year-old Lagavulin Single Malt Scotch .
The traits of the character were also partially inspired by a real-life Libertarian elected official in Burbank , California .
Offerman 's portrayal of Ron Swanson has received critical acclaim .
The character developed a cult following and is widely considered the breakout character of the series .
Schur called Ron `` our cast MVP . ''
He was described by some critics as one of the best characters in a situation comedy in decades , and has been called the best comedic character on television since Cosmo Kramer of Seinfeld .
Ron 's platonic relationship with Leslie has been compared to that of Mary Richards and Lou Grant in The Mary Tyler Moore Show .
Offerman received several award nominations for the role , and won the TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Comedy , tying with Ty Burrell of Modern Family .