Russia -LRB- -LSB- ˈrʌʃə -RSB- -LSB- Россия , Rossiya , rɐˈsʲijə -RSB- -RRB- , also officially the Russian Federation -LRB- -LSB- Российская Федерация , r = Rossiyskaya Federatsiya , p = rɐˈsʲijskəjə fʲɪdʲɪˈratsɨjə -RSB- -RRB- , is a country in Eurasia .
At 17075200 km2 , Russia is the largest country in the world by surface area , covering more than one-eighth of the Earth 's inhabited land area , and the ninth most populous , with over 144 million people at the end of March 2016 .
The European western part of the country is much more populated and urbanised than the eastern ; about 77 % of the population live in European Russia .
Russia 's capital Moscow is one of the largest cities in the world ; other major urban centers include Saint Petersburg , Novosibirsk , Yekaterinburg , Nizhny Novgorod and Kazan .
Extending across the entirety of Northern Asia and much of Eastern Europe , Russia spans eleven time zones and incorporates a wide range of environments and landforms .
From northwest to southeast , Russia shares land borders with Norway , Finland , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania and Poland -LRB- both with Kaliningrad Oblast -RRB- , Belarus , Ukraine , Georgia , Azerbaijan , Kazakhstan , China , Mongolia , and North Korea .
It shares maritime borders with Japan by the Sea of Okhotsk and the U.S. state of Alaska across the Bering Strait .
The East Slavs emerged as a recognizable group in Europe between the 3rd and 8th centuries AD .
Founded and ruled by a Varangian warrior elite and their descendants , the medieval state of Rus arose in the 9th century .
In 988 it adopted Orthodox Christianity from the Byzantine Empire , beginning the synthesis of Byzantine and Slavic cultures that defined Russian culture for the next millennium .
Rus ' ultimately disintegrated into a number of smaller states ; most of the Rus ' lands were overrun by the Mongol invasion and became tributaries of the nomadic Golden Horde in the 13th century .
The Grand Duchy of Moscow gradually reunified the surrounding Russian principalities , achieved independence from the Golden Horde , and came to dominate the cultural and political legacy of Kievan Rus ' .
By the 18th century , the nation had greatly expanded through conquest , annexation , and exploration to become the Russian Empire , which was the third largest empire in history , stretching from Poland on the west to Alaska on the east .
Following the Russian Revolution , the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic became the largest and leading constituent of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics , the world 's first constitutionally socialist state .
The Soviet Union played a decisive role in the Allied victory in World War II , and emerged as a recognized superpower and rival to the United States during the Cold War .
The Soviet era saw some of the most significant technological achievements of the 20th century , including the world 's first human-made satellite and the launching of the first humans in space .
By the end of 1990 , the Soviet Union had the world 's second largest economy , largest standing military in the world and the largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction .
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 , fifteen independent republics emerged from the USSR : Russia , Ukraine , Belarus , Kazakhstan , Uzbekistan , Armenia , Azerbaijan , Estonia , Georgia , Kyrgyzstan , Latvia , Lithuania , Moldova , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan ; the Russian SFSR reconstituted itself as the Russian Federation and is recognized as the continuing legal personality and sole successor state of the Soviet Union .
It is governed as a federal semi-presidential republic .
The Russian economy ranks as the twelfth largest by nominal GDP and sixth largest by purchasing power parity in 2015 .
Russia 's extensive mineral and energy resources are the largest such reserves in the world , making it one of the leading producers of oil and natural gas globally .
The country is one of the five recognized nuclear weapons states and possesses the largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction .
Russia is a great power as well as a regional power and has been characterised as a potential superpower .
It is permanent member of the United Nations Security Council , as well as a member of the G20 , the Council of Europe , the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation -LRB- APEC -RRB- , the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation -LRB- SCO -RRB- , the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe -LRB- OSCE -RRB- , and the World Trade Organization -LRB- WTO -RRB- , as well as being the leading member of the Commonwealth of Independent States -LRB- CIS -RRB- , the Collective Security Treaty Organization -LRB- CSTO -RRB- and one of the five members of the Eurasian Economic Union -LRB- EEU -RRB- , along with Armenia , Belarus , Kazakhstan , and Kyrgyzstan .