Russell Edward Brand -LRB- born 4 June 1975 -RRB- is an English comedian , actor , radio host , author , and activist .
Beginning his career as a stand-up comedian and later becoming an MTV presenter , Brand first achieved notoriety in 2004 as the host of Big Brother 's Big Mouth , a Big Brother spin-off .
In 2007 , he had his first major film role in St Trinian 's , and the following year he landed a major role in the romantic comedy-drama Forgetting Sarah Marshall ; the film led to him starring in a spin off , the rock comedy Get Him to the Greek , alongside Jonah Hill in 2010 .
He also worked as a voice actor in the animated films Despicable Me in 2010 , Hop in 2011 , and Despicable Me 2 in 2013 , and played the title character of the 2011 remake of the romantic comedy Arthur .
In 2013 , he released the successful stand-up special Messiah Complex .
Since guest editing an edition of British political weekly New Statesman in 2013 , Brand has become known as a public activist and campaigner , and has spoken on a wide range of political and cultural issues , including wealth inequality , addiction , corporate capitalism , climate change , and media bias .
This includes a much publicised interview with Newsnight host Jeremy Paxman in 2013 , in which he disparaged the British political system as ineffectual , encouraged the British electorate not to vote , and endorsed an egalitarian socialist revolution to replace the status quo .
In 2014 , Brand launched his political-comedy web series The Trews , released a book entitled Revolution , and began work on a documentary about financial inequality with Michael Winterbottom .
Over the course of his career , Brand has been the subject of frequent media coverage and controversy for issues such as his promiscuity and drug use , his outrageous behaviour at various award ceremonies , his dismissal from MTV and resignation from the BBC , and his two-year marriage with singer Katy Perry .
He has incorporated many of his controversial public antics into his comedic material .
In 2015 a biographical documentary called Brand : A Second Coming was released .