Rwanda -LRB- -LSB- ɹuːˈɑːndə -RSB- or -LSB- ɹuːˈændə -RSB- ; U Rwanda -LSB- u.ɾɡwanda -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Republic of Rwanda -LRB- Repubulika y' u Rwanda République du Rwanda -RRB- , is a sovereign state in Central and East Africa and one of the smallest countries on the African mainland .
Located a few degrees south of the Equator , Rwanda is bordered by Uganda , Tanzania , Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
Rwanda is in the African Great Lakes region and is highly elevated ; its geography is dominated by mountains in the west and savanna to the east , with numerous lakes throughout the country .
The climate is temperate to subtropical , with two rainy seasons and two dry seasons each year .
The population is young and predominantly rural , with a density among the highest in Africa .
Rwandans are drawn from just one cultural and linguistic group , the Banyarwanda , although within this group there are three subgroups : the Hutu , Tutsi and Twa .
The Twa are a forest-dwelling pygmy people descended from Rwanda 's earliest inhabitants .
Scholars disagree on the origins of and differences between the Hutu and Tutsi ; some believe differences are derived from former social castes within a single people , while others believe the Hutu and Tutsi arrived in the country separately , and from different locations .
Christianity is the largest religion in the country ; the principal language is Kinyarwanda , spoken by most Rwandans , with English and French serving as official languages .
Rwanda has a presidential system of government .
The president is Paul Kagame of the Rwandan Patriotic Front -LRB- RPF -RRB- , who took office in 2000 .
Rwanda today has low corruption compared with neighbouring countries , although human rights organisations report suppression of opposition groups , intimidation and restrictions on freedom of speech .
The country has been governed by an ordered administrative hierarchy since pre-colonial times ; there are five provinces delineated by borders drawn in 2006 .
Rwanda is one of only two countries with a female majority in the national parliament .
Hunter gatherers settled the territory in the stone and iron ages , followed later by Bantu peoples .
The population coalesced first into clans and then into kingdoms .
The Kingdom of Rwanda dominated from the mid-18th century , with the Tutsi kings conquering others militarily , centralising power and later enacting anti-Hutu policies .
Germany colonised Rwanda in 1884 as part of German East Africa , followed by Belgium , which invaded in 1916 during the First World War .
Both European nations ruled through the kings and perpetuated a pro-Tutsi policy .
The Hutu population revolted in 1959 .
They massacred numerous Tutsi and ultimately established an independent , Hutu-dominated state in 1962 .
The Tutsi-led Rwandan Patriotic Front launched a civil war in 1990 .
Social tensions erupted in the 1994 genocide , in which Hutu extremists killed an estimated 500,000 to 1.3 million Tutsi and moderate Hutu .
The RPF ended the genocide with a military victory .
Rwanda 's economy suffered heavily during the 1994 Rwandan Genocide , but has since strengthened .
The economy is based mostly on subsistence agriculture .
Coffee and tea are the major cash crops for export .
Tourism is a fast-growing sector and is now the country 's leading foreign exchange earner .
Rwanda is one of only two countries in which mountain gorillas can be visited safely , and visitors pay for gorilla tracking permits .
Music and dance are an integral part of Rwandan culture , particularly drums and the highly choreographed intore dance .
Traditional arts and crafts are produced throughout the country .