Helen Folasade Adu , OBE -LRB- Fọláṣadé Adú -LSB- fɔ̄láʃādé ādú -RSB- born 16 January 1959 -RRB- , known professionally as Sade Adu or simply Sade -LRB- -LSB- ʃɑːˈdeɪ -RSB- -RRB- , is a Nigerian-born British singer-songwriter , composer , arranger , and record producer .
With members Paul S. Denman , Andrew Hale , and Stuart Matthewman , she gained worldwide fame as the lead vocalist of the English band Sade .
Following a brief stint as a fashion designer of men 's clothing and part-time model , Adu began backup singing for the band Pride .
Growing attention from record labels led her , along with other fellow band members , to separate from Pride and form the band Sade .
Following a record deal with Epic Records the band released their debut album Diamond Life -LRB- 1984 -RRB- .
The album sold over six million copies , becoming one of the top-selling debut recordings of the 1980s , and the best-selling debut ever by a British female vocalist .
Following the release of the band 's debut album , they went on to release a string of multi-platinum selling albums .
Their follow-up Promise was released in 1985 and peaked at number-one in the UK Albums Chart , the US Billboard 200 , and went on to sell four million copies in the US .
Sade would later go on to make her acting debut in the British film , Absolute Beginners -LRB- 1986 -RRB- , before the release of the band 's albums , Stronger Than Pride -LRB- 1988 -RRB- and Love Deluxe -LRB- 1992 -RRB- .
After the release of the fifth album , Lovers Rock -LRB- 2000 -RRB- , the band embarked on a ten-year hiatus in which Sade raised her daughter .
Following the hiatus , the band returned with their sixth album , Soldier of Love -LRB- 2010 -RRB- which became a commercial success and won a Grammy Award .
Sade 's US certified sales so far stand at 23.5 million units according to Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- website and have sold more than 50 million units worldwide to date .
The band was ranked at number 50 on VH1 's list of the `` 100 greatest artists of all time '' .
In 2002 , Adu was awarded an OBE for services to music , and stated her award was `` a great gesture to me and all black women in England '' .
In 2010 , The Sunday Times described her as the most successful solo British female artist in history .
In 2012 , Sade was listed at number 30 on VH1 's `` 100 Greatest Women In Music '' .