Saif Ali Khan -LRB- -LSB- ˈsɛːf əˈli ˈxaːn -RSB- ; born Sajid Ali Khan on 16 August 1970 -RRB- is an Indian film actor and producer .
The son of actress Sharmila Tagore and the late cricketer Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi , Khan made his acting debut in Yash Chopra 's unsuccessful drama Parampara -LRB- 1993 -RRB- , but achieved success with his roles in the romantic drama Yeh Dillagi and the action film Main Khiladi Tu Anari -LRB- both 1994 -RRB- .
Khan 's career prospect declined through much of the 1990s , and his biggest commercial success of the decade came with the ensemble drama Hum Saath-Saath Hain -LRB- 1999 -RRB- .
He rose to prominence with roles in two ensemble comedy-dramasDil Chahta Hai -LRB- 2001 -RRB- and Kal Ho Naa Ho -LRB- 2003 -RRB- .
The 2004 romantic comedy Hum Tum proved to be Khan 's first success in which he played the sole male lead , earning him the National Film Award for Best Actor , and starring roles in the drama Parineeta and the romantic comedy Salaam Namaste -LRB- both 2005 -RRB- established him as a leading actor in Bollywood .
He went on to earn wide critical praise for his portrayal of an apprentice in the 2006 English film Being Cyrus , a character based on William Shakespeare 's antagonist Iago in the 2006 crime film Omkara and a terrorist in the 2009 thriller Kurbaan .
Khan 's greatest commercial success came with the 2008 thriller Race and its 2013 sequel , the 2009 romance Love Aaj Kal , and the 2012 romantic comedy Cocktail .
Khan is the recipient of several accolades , including a National Film Award and six Filmfare Awards , and received the Padma Shri , the fourth highest Indian civilian award , in 2010 .
He has been noted for his performances in a range of film genres -- from crime dramas to thrillers and occasional romances -- and his film roles have been credited with contributing to a change in the concept of a Hindi film hero .
Khan was married to his first wife , Amrita Singh , for thirteen years , after which he married the actress Kareena Kapoor .
He has three childrentwo with Singh and one with Kapoor .
In addition to film acting , Khan is a frequent television presenter , stage show performer and the owner of the production company Illuminati Films .