Saint Peter -LRB- Syriac/Aramaic : ܫܸܡܥܘܿܢ ܟܹ݁ܐܦ݂ܵܐ , Shemayon Keppa , שמעון בר יונה , Πέτρος , according to the New Testament , was one of the Twelve Apostles of Jesus Christ , leaders of the early Christian Great Church .
Hippolytus of Rome , a 3rd-century theologian , gave him the title of `` Apostle of the Apostles '' .
According to Catholic teaching , Peter was ordained by Jesus in the `` Rock of My Church '' dialogue in Matthew .
He is traditionally counted as the first Bishop of Romeor popeand also by Eastern Christian tradition as the first Patriarch of Antioch .
The ancient Christian churches all venerate Peter as a major saint and as the founder of the Church of Antioch and the Roman Church , but differ in their attitudes regarding the authority of his present-day successors .
The New Testament indicates that Peter was the son of John -LRB- or Jonah or Jona -RRB- and was from the village of Bethsaida in the province of Galilee or Gaulanitis .
His brother Andrew was also an apostle .
According to New Testament accounts , Peter was one of twelve apostles chosen by Jesus from his first disciples .
Originally a fisherman , he played a leadership role and was with Jesus during events witnessed by only a few apostles , such as the Transfiguration .
According to the gospels , Peter confessed Jesus as the Messiah , was part of Jesus 's inner circle , thrice denied Jesus and wept bitterly once he realised his deed , and preached on the day of Pentecost .
According to Christian tradition , Peter was crucified in Rome under Emperor Nero Augustus Caesar .
It is traditionally held that he was crucified upside down at his own request , since he saw himself unworthy to be crucified in the same way as Jesus .
Tradition holds that he was crucified at the site of the Clementine Chapel .
His remains are said to be those contained in the underground Confessio of St. Peter 's Basilica , where Pope Paul VI announced in 1968 the excavated discovery of a first-century Roman cemetery .
Every 29 June since 1736 , a statue of Saint Peter in St. Peter 's Basilica is adorned with papal tiara , ring of the fisherman , and papal vestments , as part of the celebration of the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul .
According to Catholic doctrine , the direct papal successor to Saint Peter is the incumbent pope , currently Pope .
Two general epistles in the New Testament are ascribed to Peter , but modern scholars reject the Petrine authorship of both .
The Gospel of Mark was traditionally thought to show the influence of Peter 's preaching and eyewitness memories .
Several other books bearing his namethe Acts of Peter , Gospel of Peter , Preaching of Peter , Apocalypse of Peter , and Judgment of Peterare considered by Christian denominations as apocryphal , and are thus not included in their Bible canons .