Ahmed Salman Rushdie , FRSL -LRB- -LSB- sælˈmɑːn_ˈrʊʃdi -RSB- अहमद सलमान रुशदी , ; born 19 June 1947 -RRB- is a British Indian novelist and essayist .
His second novel , Midnight 's Children -LRB- 1981 -RRB- , won the Booker Prize in 1981 and was deemed to be `` the best novel of all winners '' on two separate occasions , marking the 25th and the 40th anniversary of the prize .
Much of his fiction is set on the Indian subcontinent .
He combines magical realism with historical fiction ; his work is concerned with the many connections , disruptions , and migrations between Eastern and Western civilizations .
His epic fourth novel , The Satanic Verses -LRB- 1988 -RRB- , was the subject of a major controversy , provoking protests from Muslims in several countries .
Death threats were made against him , including a fatwā calling for his assassination issued by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini , the Supreme Leader of Iran , on 14 February 1989 .
The British government put Rushdie under police protection .
In 1983 Rushdie was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature , the UK 's senior literary organisation .
He was appointed Commandeur de l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres of France in January 1999 .
In June 2007 , Queen Elizabeth II knighted him for his services to literature .
In 2008 , The Times ranked him thirteenth on its list of the 50 greatest British writers since 1945 .
Since 2000 , Rushdie has lived in the United States .
He was named Distinguished Writer in Residence at the Arthur L. Carter Journalism Institute of New York University in 2015 .
Earlier , he taught at Emory University .
He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters .
In 2012 , he published Joseph Anton : A Memoir , an account of his life in the wake of the controversy over The Satanic Verses .
Rushdie was strongly favoured to have received the Nobel Prize in Literature but the Nobel organisers were later quoted as saying that they would have been `` too predictable , too popular . ''