`` Same Old Love '' is a song by American singer Selena Gomez from her second studio album , Revival -LRB- 2015 -RRB- .
The track was written by Charli XCX , Ross Golan , and its producers Stargate and Benny Blanco .
It was first composed by XCX and Stargate , later recorded by Gomez without the former in the studio at the time .
`` Same Old Love '' is a midtempo electropop and synthpop song backed by a wonky piano loop , a finger-click beat and Italo disco synths .
Gomez uses an uncharacteristic forceful , emotive tone and raspy delivery , accompanied by XCX on background vocals .
Lyrically , `` Same Old Love '' is a torch song .
According to Gomez , the lyrics are a representation of various stages of different relationships and are about getting rid of everything toxic in her life , also inspired by her relationship with her father .
`` Same Old Love '' was released as the second single from Revival on September 10 , 2015 .
A number of remixes were commissioned for its release , including an official remix featuring rapper Fetty Wap .
Music critics mostly complimented its catchy tune and understated , moody sound .
The song peaked at number five on the US Billboard Hot 100 , marking Gomez 's fourth top 10 and second consecutive top 5 single from the album .
`` Same Old Love '' also reached number one on the US Mainstream Top 40 chart and the top 10 in Canada , the Czech Republic and Slovakia .
It was accompanied by a music video directed by Michael Haussman and filmed in the Broadway Theater District of Los Angeles .
It premiered as an Apple Music exclusive on September 22 , 2015 and was well received by critics who complimented Gomez 's styling and the emotional storyline .
The video was inspired by Gomez 's relationships with her loved ones and fans , and singer Tony Bennett .
It featured Gomez witnessing several dramatic vignettes on the streets of Los Angeles , and performing at a theater .
Gomez promoted `` Same Old Love '' with several televised performances , including on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon , and at the 2015 American Music Awards .