Same-sex marriage , also known as gay marriage , is marriage between people of the same sex , either as a secular civil ceremony or in a religious setting .
In the late 20th century , rites of marriage for same-sex couples without legal recognition became increasingly common .
The first law providing for marriage of people of the same sex in modern times was enacted in 2001 in the Netherlands .
, same-sex marriage is legally recognized -LRB- nationwide or in some parts -RRB- in the following countries : Argentina , Belgium , Brazil , Canada , Colombia , Denmark,Same-sex marriage is legal in Denmark proper and Greenland .
Legislation allowing same-sex marriage in the Faroe Islands has received royal assent though is not yet in effect .
Finland , France , Iceland , Ireland , Luxembourg , Mexico,Same-sex marriage is legal in the states of Campeche , Coahuila , Colima , Jalisco , Michoacán , Morelos , Nayarit , Quintana Roo and Mexico City as well as in some municipalities in Guerrero , Puebla , Querétaro and Tamaulipas .
Same-sex marriages performed in these jurisdictions are recognized throughout Mexico .
the Netherlands,Same-sex marriage is legal in The Netherlands proper .
Same-sex marriages performed there are recognized in Aruba , Curaçao and Sint Maarten .
New Zealand,Same-sex marriage is legal in New Zealand proper , though is not legal in Tokelau , the Cook Islands and Niue , which together make up the Realm of New Zealand .
Norway , Portugal , South Africa , Spain , Sweden , the United Kingdom,Same-sex marriage is legal England and Wales and Scotland ; though is notably not legal in Northern Ireland .
Same-sex marriage is legal in the overseas territories of Akrotiri and Dhekelia , Ascension Island , Bermuda , the British Antarctic Territory , the British Indian Ocean Territory , Gibraltar and the Pitcairn Islands ; and in the Crown dependencies of Guernsey and the Isle of Man .
The law in the Falkland Islands is not yet in force .
the United StatesSame-sex marriage is legal in all 50 states , the District of Columbia , Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands , Puerto Rico , the United States Virgin Islands and some tribal jurisdictions .
Some tribal jurisdictions do not recognize same-sex marriage .
In the United States , Congress -LRB- not the federal courts -RRB- has legal authority over Indian country .
Thus , unless Congress passes a law regarding same-sex marriage for Indian tribes , federally recognized American Indian tribes have the legal right to form their own marriage laws .
American Samoa is the only unincorporated territory of the United States not to have legalized same-sex marriage .
and Uruguay .
Same-sex marriage is likely to soon become legal in Taiwan , after a constitutional court ruling in May 2017 .
Polls show rising support for legally recognizing same-sex marriage in the Americas , Australia and most of Europe .
However , as of 2017 , South Africa is the only African country where same-sex marriage is recognized .
No country in Asia legally recognises same-sex marriage ceremonies performed under its jurisdiction , although Israel recognises same-sex marriages performed overseas for some purposes .
Introduction of same-sex marriage laws has varied by jurisdiction , being variously accomplished through legislative change to marriage laws , a court ruling based on constitutional guarantees of equality , or by direct popular vote -LRB- via ballot initiative or referendum -RRB- .
The recognition of same-sex marriage is a political and social issue , and also a religious issue in many countries , and debates continue to arise over whether people in same-sex relationships should be allowed marriage or some similar status -LRB- a civil union -RRB- .
Same-sex marriage can provide those in same-sex relationships who pay their taxes with government services and make financial demands on them comparable to those afforded to and required of those in opposite-sex marriages .
Same-sex marriage also gives them legal protections such as inheritance and hospital visitation rights .
Various faith communities around the world support allowing those of the same sex to marry , while many major religions oppose same-sex marriage .
Opponents of same-sex marriages have argued that recognition of same-sex marriages would erode religious freedoms , undermine a right of children to be raised by their biological mother and father or erode the institution of marriage itself .
Some analysts state that financial , psychological and physical well-being are enhanced by marriage , and that children of same-sex parents or carers benefit from being raised by two parents within a legally recognized union supported by society 's institutions .
Court documents filed by American scientific associations also state that singling out gay men and women as ineligible for marriage both stigmatizes and invites public discrimination against them .
The American Anthropological Association asserts that social science research does not support the view that either civilization or viable social orders depend upon marriage as an exclusively heterosexual institution .