Samsung Group -LRB- ; -LSB- sʰamsʰʌŋ -RSB- -RRB- is a South Korean multinational conglomerate headquartered in Samsung Town , Seoul .
It comprises numerous affiliated businesses , most of them united under the Samsung brand , and is the largest South Korean chaebol -LRB- business conglomerate -RRB- .
Samsung was founded by Lee Byung-chul in 1938 as a trading company .
Over the next three decades , the group diversified into areas including food processing , textiles , insurance , securities and retail .
Samsung entered the electronics industry in the late 1960s and the construction and shipbuilding industries in the mid-1970s ; these areas would drive its subsequent growth .
Following Lee 's death in 1987 , Samsung was separated into four business groups -- Samsung Group , Shinsegae Group , CJ Group and Hansol Group .
Since 1990 , Samsung has increasingly globalised its activities and electronics ; in particular , its mobile phones and semiconductors have become its most important source of income .
Notable Samsung industrial affiliates include Samsung Electronics -LRB- the world 's 2nd largest information technology company measured by 2015 revenues , and 5th in market value -RRB- , Samsung Heavy Industries -LRB- the world 's 2nd largest shipbuilder measured by 2010 revenues -RRB- , and Samsung Engineering and Samsung C&T -LRB- respectively the world 's 13th and 36th largest construction companies -RRB- .
Other notable subsidiaries include Samsung Life Insurance -LRB- the world 's 14th largest life insurance company -RRB- , Samsung Everland -LRB- operator of Everland Resort , the oldest theme park in South Korea -RRB- and Cheil Worldwide -LRB- the world 's 15th largest advertising agency measured by 2012 revenues -RRB- .
Samsung has a powerful influence on South Korea 's economic development , politics , media and culture and has been a major driving force behind the `` Miracle on the Han River '' .
Its affiliate companies produce around a fifth of South Korea 's total exports .
Samsung 's revenue was equal to 17 % of South Korea 's $ 1,082 billion GDP .