The Sands Hotel and Casino was a historic hotel and casino on the Las Vegas Strip in Nevada , United States , that operated from 1952 to 1996 .
Designed by the architect Wayne McAllister , with a prominent 56 ft high sign , the Sands was the seventh resort to open on the Strip .
During its heyday , the Sands was the center of entertainment and `` cool '' on the Strip , and hosted many famous entertainers of the day , most notably the Rat Pack .
The hotel was established in 1952 by Texan oil tycoon Jake Freedman , who bought up the LaRue Restaurant , which had opened two years earlier .
The hotel was opened on December 15 , 1952 as a casino with 200 rooms , and was established less than three months after the opening of another notable landmark , Sahara Hotel and Casino .
The hotel rooms were divided into four two-story motel wings , each with fifty rooms , and named after famous race tracks .
The opening was widely publicized , and every guest was given a Chamois bag with silver dollars .
Crime bosses such as Meyer Lansky and Frank Costello acquired shares in the hotel and attracted Frank Sinatra , who made his performing debut at Sands in October 1953 .
Sinatra later bought a share in the hotel himself .
Sinatra and Sammy Davis , Jr. were instrumental throughout the late 1950s and early 1960s in bringing a change in racial policy in Sands , and after an incident in 1961 , it began employing blacks .
In 1960 the classic caper film Ocean 's 11 was shot at the hotel , and it subsequently attained iconic status , with regular performances by Sinatra , Dean Martin , Sammy Davis .
Jr. , Red Skelton and others , who performed regularly in the hotel 's world-renowned Copa Room .
Much of the musical success of the Copa Room is credited to the room 's band leader and musical conductor Antonio Morelli , whose house orchestra performed in the recording of hundreds of albums over the years .
In the mid 1960s , Sands and its adjacent properties were bought by the reclusive businessman Howard Hughes , who built a 500-room tower and modernized the hotel .
After the 1970s it fell into decline until its final owner , Sheldon Adelson , made the decision to shut it down and to build a brand new resort .
The last dice in the casino was rolled by Bob Stupak just after 6pm on June 30 , 1996 .
On November 26 of that year , it was finally imploded and demolished , much to the dismay of longtime employees and sentimentalists .
Today , The Venetian stands where the Sands once stood .