Santos Futebol Clube -LRB- -LSB- ˈsɐ̃tus futʃiˈbɔw ˈklubi -RSB- -RRB- , commonly known as Santos or Peixe -LRB- -LSB- ˈpejʃi -RSB- -RRB- , is a Brazilian professional football club based in Vila Belmiro , a bairro in the city of Santos .
Despite being primarily a football club , Santos compete in a number of different sports , including American football , surfing , and even eSports .
It plays in the Paulistão , the State of São Paulo 's premier state league , as well as the Brasileirão , the top tier of the Brazilian football league system .
Santos are one of the only four clubs to have never been relegated , along with São Paulo , Flamengo and Cruzeiro .
The club was founded in 1912 by the initiative of three sports enthusiasts from Santos by Raimundo Marques , Mário Ferraz de Campos , and Argemiro de Souza Júnior as a response to the lack of representation the city had in football .
Since then , Santos became one of Brazil 's most successful clubs , becoming a symbol of Jogo Bonito -LRB- English : the Beautiful Game -RRB- in football culture , hence the motto `` Técnica e Disciplina '' -LRB- Technique and discipline -RRB- .
The most recognized Santista anthem is the `` Leão do Mar '' written by Mangeri Neto .
This was largely thanks to the Peixe 's golden generation of the 1960s which contained players such as Gilmar , Mauro Ramos , Mengálvio , Coutinho , Pepe and Pelé , named the `` Athlete of the Century '' by the International Olympic Committee , and widely regarded among football historians , former players and fans to be the best and most accomplished footballer in the game 's history .
Os Santásticos , considered by some the best club team of all times , won a total of 24 titles during that decade including five consecutive Brasileirões , a feat that remains unequaled until today .
Os Santásticos also became the first squad in the world to win the Continental Treble , winning the Paulistão , the Brasileirão , and the Copa Libertadores in 1962 .
Santos is one of the most successful clubs in the Brasileirão , becoming national champions on eight occasions .
It has also won 21 Paulistãos , three Copa Libertadores , two European/South American Cups , one Supercopa de Campeones Intercontinentales , one Copa CONMEBOL -LRB- the precursor of current Copa Sudamericana -RRB- , one Copa do Brasil and one Recopa Sudamericana .
In 1962 , Santos became the first club in the world to win four out of four competitions in a single year , thus completing the quadruple , comprising the aforementioned treble and the European/South American Cup .
On January 20 , 1998 , Santos became the first team , in any category in the world , to reach the milestone of 10,000 goals in the entire history of football , scored by Jorginho .
The Peixe play their home games at the Vila Belmiro , which currently holds up to 20,120 spectators .
Santos ' regular kit is white shirts , with white shorts , accompanied by white socks .
Kappa are the kit manufacturers .
Santos holds many long-standing rivalries , most notably against São Paulo , Palmeiras and Corinthians .
It has contributed many key and famous players towards Brazil 's FIFA World Cup squads , including eleven world champions out of its 45 contributors and two FIFA World Cup winning captains .
In 2013 , the club is the 2nd most valuable club in Brazil and Latin America , and 38th most valuable club in the world according to Brand Finance , worth over $ 65 million .
In terms of revenue , Santos is Brazil 's 4th richest sports club and one of the biggest football clubs in the world , generating an annual turnover of over $ 114 million in 2012 .