Sarcoidosis is a disease involving abnormal collections of inflammatory cells that form lumps known as granulomas .
The disease usually begins in the lungs , skin , or lymph nodes .
Less commonly affected are the eyes , liver , heart , and brain .
Any organ , however , can be affected .
The signs and symptoms depend on the organ involved .
Often there are no , or only mild , symptoms .
When it affects the lungs there may be wheezing , cough , shortness of breath , or chest pain .
Some may have Löfgren syndrome in which there is fever , large lymph nodes , arthritis , and a rash known as erythema nodosum .
The cause of sarcoidosis is unknown .
Some believe it may be due to an immune reaction to a trigger such as an infection or chemicals in those who are genetically predisposed .
Those with affected family members are at greater risk .
Diagnosis is partly based on signs and symptoms , which may be supported by biopsy .
Findings that make it likely include large lymph nodes at the root of the lung on both sides , high blood calcium with a normal parathyroid hormone level , or elevated levels of angiotensin converting enzyme -LRB- ACE -RRB- in the blood .
The diagnosis should only be made after excluding other possible causes of similar symptoms such as tuberculosis .
Many people clear up without any treatment within a few years .
However some may have long term or severe disease .
Some symptoms may be improved with the use of anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen .
In cases where the condition causes significant health problems steroids such as prednisone are indicated .
Alternatively , medications such as methotrexate , chloroquine , or azathioprine may occasionally be used in an effort to decrease the side effects of steroids .
The risk of death is between one and seven percent .
There is a less than five percent chance of the disease returning in someone who has had it previously .
In 2015 pulmonary sarcoidosis and interstitial lung disease affected 1.9 million people globally and they resulted in 122,000 deaths .
It is most common in Scandinavians but occurs in all parts of the world .
In the United States risk is greater among black as opposed to white people .
It usually begins between the ages of 20 and 50 .
It occurs more often in women than men .
Sarcoidosis was first described in 1877 by the English doctor Jonathan Hutchinson as a non painful skin disease .