Saskatchewan -LRB- -LSB- səˈskætʃəwᵻn -RSB- or -LSB- - ˌwɑːn -RSB- -RRB- is a prairie and boreal province in western Canada , the only province without natural borders .
It has an area of 651900 km2 , nearly 10 percent of which -LRB- 59366 km2 -RRB- is fresh water , composed mostly of rivers , reservoirs , and the province 's 100,000 lakes .
Saskatchewan is bordered on the west by Alberta , on the north by the Northwest Territories , on the east by Manitoba , to the northeast by Nunavut , and on the south by the U.S. states of Montana and North Dakota .
As of December 2013 , Saskatchewan 's population was estimated at 1,114,170 .
Residents primarily live in the southern prairie half of the province , while the northern boreal half is mostly forested and sparsely populated .
Of the total population , roughly half live in the province 's largest city , Saskatoon , or the provincial capital , Regina .
Other notable cities include Prince Albert , Moose Jaw , Yorkton , Swift Current , North Battleford , and the border city Lloydminster -LRB- partially within Alberta -RRB- .
Saskatchewan is a landlocked province with large distances to moderating bodies of waters .
As a result , its climate is extremely continental , rendering severe winters throughout the province .
Southern areas have very warm or hot summers .
Midale and Yellow Grass near the U.S. border are tied for the highest ever recorded temperatures in Canada with 45 C observed at both locations on July 5 , 1937 .
In winter , temperatures below -45 C are possible even in the south during extreme cold snaps .
Saskatchewan has been inhabited for thousands of years by various indigenous groups , and first explored by Europeans in 1690 and settled in 1774 .
It became a province in 1905 , carved out from the vast North-West Territories , which had until then included most of the Canadian Prairies .
In the early 20th century the province became known as a stronghold for Canadian social democracy ; North America 's first social-democratic government was elected in 1944 .
The province 's economy is based on agriculture , mining , and energy .
Saskatchewan 's current premier is Brad Wall and its lieutenant-governor is Vaughn Solomon Schofield .
In 1992 , the federal and provincial governments signed a historic land claim agreement with First Nations in Saskatchewan .
The First Nations received compensation and were permitted to buy land on the open market for the tribes ; they have acquired about 3079 km2 , now reserve lands .
Some First Nations have used their settlement to invest in urban areas , including Saskatoon .