Saw is an American horror franchise distributed by Lions Gate Entertainment , produced by Twisted Pictures and created by two Australians , director James Wan and screenwriter Leigh Whannell , that consists of seven feature films and additional media .
In 2003 , James Wan and Leigh Whannell created a short film to help pitch as a potential feature film .
This was successfully done in 2004 with the release of the first installment at the Sundance Film Festival .
It was released theatrically that October .
The sequels were directed by Darren Lynn Bousman , David Hackl , and Kevin Greutert , and were written by Wan , Whannell , Bousman , Patrick Melton , and Marcus Dunstan , and were released subsequently every October , on the Friday before Halloween , between 2004 and 2010 .
Both of the creators remained with the franchise as executive producers .
On July 22 , 2010 , producer Mark Burg confirmed that the seventh film , Saw 3D , is the final installment of the series .
Series creators James Wan and Leigh Whannell are still open to continuing the series , however , if they can do something `` different '' with the material .
The films collectively grossed over $ 873 million at the box office worldwide .
Lionsgate reportedly expressed interest in continuing the franchise in 2012 with a reboot .
However , in November 2013 , it was reported that they were in active development of a sequel .
The franchise revolves around John Kramer , also called the `` Jigsaw Killer '' or simply `` Jigsaw '' .
He was introduced briefly in Saw and developed in more detail in Saw II .
Rather than killing his victims outright , Jigsaw traps them in situations that he calls `` tests '' or `` games '' to test their will to live through physical or psychological torture .
Despite the fact that John was murdered in Saw III , the films continue to focus on the posthumous influence of the Jigsaw Killer and his apprentices by exploring his character via flashbacks .
The film series as a whole has received mostly mixed to negative reviews by critics , but has been a financial success at the box office and is one of the highest grossing horror film franchies of all time .
While the films are often compared to the American horror film Hostel -LRB- 2005 -RRB- and classified as torture porn by critics , the creators of Saw disagree with the term `` torture porn '' .
Writer Luke Y. Thompson of OC Weekly argued that , unlike Hostel , the Saw films actually have less torture than most in the sense of sadism or masochism , as Jigsaw believes that those who survive his methods will be stronger people for it .
He called him a kind of a '' -LRB- deranged -RRB- philanthropist '' .