Scabies , previously known as the seven-year itch , is a contagious skin infestation by the mite Sarcoptes scabiei .
The most common symptoms are severe itchiness and a pimple-like rash .
Occasionally tiny burrows may be seen in the skin .
When first infected , usually two to six weeks are required before symptoms occur .
If a person develops a second infection later in life , symptoms may begin within a day .
These symptoms can be present across most of the body or just certain areas such as the wrists , between fingers , or along the waistline .
The head may be affected , but this is typically only in young children .
The itch is often worse at night .
Scratching may cause skin breakdown and an additional bacterial infection of the skin .
Scabies is caused by infection with the female mite Sarcoptes scabiei var .
hominis .
The mites burrow into the skin to live and deposit eggs .
The symptoms of scabies are due to an allergic reaction to the mites .
Often only between ten and fifteen mites are involved in an infection .
Scabies is most often spread during a relatively long period of direct skin contact with an infected person -LRB- at least 10 minutes -RRB- such as that which may occur during sex .
Spread of disease may occur even if the person has not developed symptoms yet .
Crowded living conditions such as those found in child care facilities , group homes , and prisons increase the risk of spread .
Areas with a lack of access to water also have higher rates of disease .
Crusted scabies is a more severe form of the disease .
It typically only occurs in those with a poor immune system and people may have millions of mites , making them much more contagious .
In these cases spread of infection may occur during brief contact or via contaminated objects .
The mite is very small and usually not directly visible .
Diagnosis is based on the signs and symptoms .
A number of medications are available to treat those infected , including permethrin , crotamiton and lindane creams and ivermectin pills .
Sexual contacts within the last month and people who live in the same house should also be treated at the same time .
Bedding and clothing used in the last three days should be washed in hot water and dried in a hot dryer .
As the mite does not live for more than three days away from human skin more washing is not needed .
Symptoms may continue for two to four weeks following treatment .
If after this time there continue to be symptoms retreatment may be needed .
Scabies is one of the three most common skin disorders in children , along with ringworm and bacterial skin infections .
As of 2015 it affects approximately 204 million people -LRB- 2.8 % of the world population -RRB- .
It is equally common in both sexes .
The young and the old are more commonly affected .
It also occurs more commonly in the developing world and tropical climates .
The word scabies is from scabere , `` to scratch '' .
Other animals do not spread human scabies .
Infection in other animals is typically caused by slightly different but related mites and is known as sarcoptic mange .