Schindler 's List is a 1993 American epic historical period drama film directed and co-produced by Steven Spielberg and scripted by Steven Zaillian .
It is based on the novel Schindler 's Ark by Australian novelist Thomas Keneally .
The film relates a period in the life of Oskar Schindler , an ethnic German businessman , during which he saved the lives of more than a thousand mostly Polish-Jewish refugees from the Holocaust by employing them in his factories during World War II .
It stars Liam Neeson as Schindler , Ralph Fiennes as SS officer Amon Göth , and Ben Kingsley as Schindler 's Jewish accountant Itzhak Stern .
Ideas for a film about the Schindlerjuden -LRB- Schindler Jews -RRB- were proposed as early as 1963 .
Poldek Pfefferberg , one of the Schindlerjuden , made it his life 's mission to tell the story of Schindler .
Spielberg became interested in the story when executive Sidney Sheinberg sent him a book review of Schindler 's Ark. .
Universal Pictures bought the rights to the novel , but Spielberg , unsure if he was ready to make a film about the Holocaust , tried to pass the project to several other directors before finally deciding to direct the film himself .
Principal photography took place in Kraków , Poland , over the course of 72 days in 1993 .
Spielberg shot the film in black and white and approached it as a documentary .
Cinematographer Janusz Kamiński wanted to give the film a sense of timelessness .
John Williams composed the score , and violinist Itzhak Perlman performs the film 's main theme .
Schindler 's List premiered on November 30 , 1993 , in Washington , D.C. and it was released on December 15 , 1993 , in the United States .
Often listed among the greatest films ever made , it was also a box office success , earning $ 321.2 million worldwide on a $ 22 million budget .
It was the recipient of seven Academy Awards -LRB- out of twelve nominations -RRB- , including Best Picture , Best Director , Best Adapted Screenplay , and Best Original Score , as well as numerous other awards -LRB- including seven BAFTAs and three Golden Globes -RRB- .
In 2007 , the American Film Institute ranked the film 8th on its list of the 100 best American films of all time .
The Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry in 2004 .