Scream is an American horror franchise created by Kevin Williamson and Wes Craven .
Starring Neve Campbell , Courteney Cox , and David Arquette , the film series grossed over $ 604 million in worldwide box-office receipts and consists of four motion pictures directed by Craven .
The first series entry , Scream , was released on December 20 , 1996 and is currently the highest-grossing slasher film in the United States .
The second entry Scream 2 was released on December 12 , 1997 followed by a third installment , Scream 3 , released February 4 , 2000 .
Eleven years after the previous film , Scream 4 was released on April 15 , 2011 .
The films follow Sidney Prescott , and her war against a succession of murderers who adopt the guise of Ghostface to stalk and torment their victims .
Sidney receives support in the films from town deputy Dewey Riley , reporter Gale Weathers , and film-geek Randy Meeks .
A tv spin off of the series was released by MTV on June 30 , 2015 .
The series follows different characters and new storylines , not connected to the film series .
Williamson 's original script was bought by Miramax and developed under the Dimension Films label by Bob and Harvey Weinstein , who recruited Craven to direct , who in turn recruited composer Marco Beltrami to score the film .
This team went on to be involved in each film in the series though Williamson was forced to take a smaller role for Scream 3 , writing only a brief plot outline due to his commitments to other projects , with Ehren Kruger replacing him as screenwriter .
The series ' violence resulted in conflicts with the Motion Picture Association of America and news media concerning censorship resulting in a reduction of violence and gore in Scream 3 when the Columbine High School massacre brought increased focus on the media 's influence on society .
Scream became notable for its use of established and recognizable actors which was uncommon for horror films at the time , yet has since become common in part due to Scream 's success .
The series , particularly the first two films , has received significant critical acclaim .
Scream has been credited with revitalizing the horror genre in the late 90s by combining a traditional slasher film with humor , awareness of horror film cliché and a clever plot .
Scream was one of the highest-grossing films of 1996 and became , and remains , the highest grossing slasher film in the world .
Its success was matched by Scream 2 which not only broke box-office records of the time , but was also argued by some critics to actually be superior to the original .
Scream 3 fared worse than its predecessors , both critically and financially , with critics commenting that it had become the type of horror film it originally parodied in Scream .
It did , however , receive some positive response , with claims that it was the perfect end to the trilogy .
The film series has been the recipient of several awards including a Saturn Award for Best Actress and MTV Movie Award for Best Female Performance for Campbell and Best Horror Film for Scream .