Sebastian Vettel -LRB- -LSB- zeˈbasti̯an ˈfɛtl̩ -RSB- ; born 3 July 1987 -RRB- is a German racing driver currently driving in Formula One for Scuderia Ferrari .
He is a four-time Formula One World Champion , having won the championship in , , and with Red Bull Racing .
Since he is one of only four drivers to have won four or more drivers ' titles , he is among the most successful F1 drivers of all time .
He is contracted to remain as a Formula One driver with Scuderia Ferrari until at least the end of 2017 .
Vettel started his career in Formula One as a test driver for BMW Sauber and made his debut with the team at the 2007 United States Grand Prix , replacing the injured Robert Kubica .
Later in the season , he signed with Toro Rosso and stayed with the team into .
He became the youngest race winner at the time when he took victory at the 2008 Italian Grand Prix .
In his first year driving for Red Bull in , Vettel finished the season as the youngest-ever World Drivers ' Championship runner-up .
The following year he went on to become the youngest driver ever to win the World Drivers ' Championship , aged 23 .
In the same year he helped Red Bull win the team 's first World Constructors ' Championship .
He followed up his first championship with three more titles , becoming the youngest double , triple and quadruple world champion in Formula One .
The and titles were decided in the final round , in 2010 coming out on top over Fernando Alonso and Ferrari in a four-way title battle at Abu Dhabi , whilst in 2012 defeating Alonso and Ferrari again by three points .
The and titles saw Vettel dominating the seasons and wrapping up the titles early .
Vettel left Red Bull Racing and ended his long-term association with the company after the season and signed a contract with Ferrari for , after activating a clause to terminate his Red Bull contract early .
After his winless 2014 season he returned to winning ways in his first Ferrari season , being the closest challenger to the dominant Mercedes cars and winning three races .
Vettel has held numerous other `` youngest '' Formula One records , among them : the youngest driver to have taken part in an official practice session of a Grand Prix -LRB- until Max Verstappen at the 2014 Japanese Grand Prix -RRB- , to score championship points -LRB- until Daniil Kvyat at the 2014 Australian Grand Prix -RRB- , to lead a race -LRB- until Max Verstappen at the 2016 Spanish Grand Prix -RRB- , to win a race -LRB- until Max Verstappen at the 2016 Spanish Grand Prix -RRB- and to secure pole position .
He is also currently in fourth place among all time race winners .