Selena Quintanilla-Pérez -LRB- -LSB- seˈlena kintaˈniʝa ˈpeɾes -RSB- or -LSB- seˈlena kintaˈniʎa ˈpeɾeθ -RSB- April 16 , 1971 -- March 31 , 1995 -RRB- was an American singer , songwriter , spokesperson , model , actress , and fashion designer .
Called the Queen of Tejano music , her contributions to music and fashion made her one of the most celebrated Mexican-American entertainers of the late 20th century .
Billboard magazine named her the `` top Latin artist of the '90s '' and the `` best selling Latin artist of the decade '' .
Media outlets called her the `` Tejano Madonna '' for her clothing choices .
She also ranks among the most influential Latin artists of all-time and is credited for catapulting a music genre into the mainstream market .
The youngest child of the Quintanilla family , she debuted on the music scene in 1980 as a member of the band Selena y Los Dinos , which also included her elder siblings A.B. Quintanilla and Suzette Quintanilla .
Selena began recording professionally in 1982 .
In the 1980s , she was often criticized and was refused bookings at venues across Texas for performing Tejano music -- a male-dominated music genre .
However , her popularity grew after she won the Tejano Music Award for Female Vocalist of the Year in 1987 , which she won nine consecutive times .
Selena signed with EMI Latin in 1989 and released her self-titled debut album the same year , while her brother became her principal music producer and songwriter .
Selena released Entre a Mi Mundo -LRB- 1992 -RRB- , which peaked at number one on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart for 19 nonconsecutive weeks .
The album 's commercial success led music critics to call the album the `` breakthrough '' recording of her musical career .
One of its singles , `` Como La Flor '' , became one of her most popular signature songs .
Live !
-LRB- 1993 -RRB- won Best Mexican/American Album at the 1994 Grammy Awards , becoming the first recording by a Tejano artist to do so .
In 1994 , Selena released Amor Prohibido , which became one of the best-selling Latin albums in the United States .
It was critically acclaimed as being responsible for Tejano music 's first marketable era as it became one of the most popular Latin music subgenres at the time .
Selena began recording English-language songs for her crossover album .
Aside from music , Selena was active in her community and donated her time to civic causes .
Coca-Cola appointed her its spokesperson in Texas .
Selena became a sex icon ; she was often criticized for wearing suggestive outfits in light of her comments about being a role model for young women .
Selena and her guitarist , Chris Pérez , eloped in April 1992 after her father raised concerns over their relationship .
On March 31 , 1995 , Selena was shot dead by Yolanda Saldívar , her friend and former employee of her Selena Etc. boutiques .
Saldívar was cornered by police when she attempted to flee , and threatened to kill herself , but was convinced to give herself up and was sentenced to life in prison with a possible parole after 30 years .
Saldívar is currently incarcerated at the Mountain View Unit in Gatesville , Texas .
Two weeks later , George W. Bush -- governor of Texas at the time -- declared Selena 's birthday Selena Day in Texas .
Her posthumous crossover album , Dreaming of You -LRB- 1995 -RRB- , debuted atop the Billboard 200 , making Selena the first Latin artist to accomplish this feat .
In 1997 , Warner Bros. released Selena , a film about her life and career , which starred Jennifer Lopez as Selena and Lupe Ontiveros as Saldívar .
, Selena has sold over 60 million albums worldwide .