Sense8 -LRB- a play on the word sensate -LSB- ˈsɛnseɪt -RSB- -RRB- is an American science fiction drama web television series created by Lana and Lilly Wachowski and J. Michael Straczynski for Netflix .
The production companies behind Sense8 include the Wachowskis ' Anarchos Productions -LRB- replaced by Lana and her wife 's Venus Castina Productions in the second season -RRB- , Straczynski 's Studio JMS , and Georgeville Television , with Unpronounceable Productions having been set up specifically for this show .
The show 's first season introduced a multinational ensemble cast , with Aml Ameen , Doona Bae , Jamie Clayton , Tina Desai , Tuppence Middleton , Max Riemelt , Miguel Ángel Silvestre and Brian J. Smith portraying eight strangers from different parts of the world who suddenly become `` sensates '' ; human beings who are mentally and emotionally linked .
Freema Agyeman , Terrence Mann , Anupam Kher , Naveen Andrews and Daryl Hannah also star .
In the second season Toby Onwumere replaces Ameen .
The show aims to explore subjects that its creators feel have not been emphasized in many science fiction shows to date , such as politics , identity , sexuality , gender and religion .
Each episode of Sense8 was written by the Wachowskis and Straczynski in the first season ; in the second season , Lilly Wachowski took a break from the show , and the scripts were written by just Lana Wachowski and Straczynski .
Most of the episodes of the two seasons were directed by the Wachowskis -LRB- or just Lana , in the second season -RRB- , with the remainder being divided between their frequent collaborators James McTeigue , Tom Tykwer and Dan Glass .
Lilly 's break during the second season marked the first time in the sisters ' career that they did not work together as a writing and directing unit .
Sense8 is filmed almost entirely on location in a multitude of cities around the world .
The first season , consisting of 12 episodes , became available for streaming on Netflix on June 5 , 2015 , and was met with generally favorable critical reception .
It became notable for its presentation of LGBT characters and themes , winning the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Drama Series .
It has also been recognized with a Location Managers Guild award for its use of locations as an integral part of the story , and a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music .
Netflix released the first episode of the second season , a two-hour Christmas special , on December 23 , 2016 ; the remaining 10 episodes of the season were released on May 5 , 2017 .
The season was met with positive critical reception .