Sepsis is a life-threatening condition that arises when the body 's response to infection causes injury to its own tissues and organs .
Common signs and symptoms include fever , increased heart rate , increased breathing rate , and confusion .
There also may be symptoms related to a specific infection , such as a cough with pneumonia , or painful urination with a kidney infection .
In the very young , old , and people with a weakened immune system , there may be no symptoms of a specific infection and the body temperature may be low or normal , rather than high .
Severe sepsis is sepsis causing poor organ function or insufficient blood flow .
Insufficient blood flow may be evident by low blood pressure , high blood lactate , or low urine output .
Septic shock is low blood pressure due to sepsis that does not improve after reasonable amounts of intravenous fluids are given .
Sepsis is caused by an immune response triggered by an infection .
Most commonly , the infection is bacterial , but it may also be from fungi , viruses , or parasites .
Common locations for the primary infection include lungs , brain , urinary tract , skin , and abdominal organs .
Risk factors include young or old age , a weakened immune system from conditions such as cancer or diabetes , major trauma , or burns .
An older method of diagnosis was based on meeting at least two systemic inflammatory response syndrome -LRB- SIRS -RRB- criteria due to a presumed infection .
In 2016 , SIRS was replaced with qSOFA which is two of the following three : increased breathing rate , change in level of consciousness , and low blood pressure .
Blood cultures are recommended preferably before antibiotics are started , however , infection of the blood is not required for the diagnosis .
Medical imaging should be used to look for the possible location of infection .
Other potential causes of similar signs and symptoms include anaphylaxis , adrenal insufficiency , low blood volume , heart failure , and pulmonary embolism , among others .
Sepsis usually is treated with intravenous fluids and antibiotics .
Typically , antibiotics are given as soon as possible .
Often , ongoing care is performed in an intensive care unit .
If fluid replacement is not enough to maintain blood pressure , medications that raise blood pressure may be used .
Mechanical ventilation and dialysis may be needed to support the function of the lungs and kidneys , respectively .
To guide treatment , a central venous catheter and an arterial catheter may be placed for access to the bloodstream .
Other measurements such as cardiac output and superior vena cava oxygen saturation may be used .
People with sepsis need preventive measures for deep vein thrombosis , stress ulcers and pressure ulcers , unless other conditions prevent such interventions .
Some might benefit from tight control of blood sugar levels with insulin .
The use of corticosteroids is controversial .
Activated drotrecogin alfa , originally marketed for severe sepsis , has not been found to be helpful , and was withdrawn from sale in 2011 .
Disease severity partly determines the outcome .
The risk of death from sepsis is as high as 30 % , from severe sepsis as high as 50 % , and from septic shock as high as 80 % .
The number of cases worldwide is unknown as there is little data from the developing world .
Estimates suggest sepsis affects millions of people a year .
In the developed world approximately 0.2 to 3 people per 1000 are affected by sepsis yearly , resulting in about a million cases per year in the United States .
Rates of disease have been increasing .
Sepsis is more common among males than females .
The medical condition has been described since the time of Hippocrates .
Septicemia and blood poisoning are terms that referred to the microorganisms or their toxins in the blood and are no longer commonly used .