Shahid Kapoor -LRB- -LSB- ʃaːɦɪd̪ kəˈpuːr -RSB- ; born 25 February 1981 -RRB- , also known as Shahid Khattar , is an Indian actor who appears in Hindi films .
The son of actors Pankaj Kapur and Neelima Azeem , Kapoor was born in New Delhi .
His parents separated when he was three , and he continued living with his mother .
They moved to Mumbai when he was 10 , where he joined Shiamak Davar 's dance academy .
Kapoor appeared as a background dancer in a few films of the 1990s , and was later featured in music videos and television commercials .
Kapoor made his film debut in 2003 with a leading role in the romantic comedy Ishq Vishk , a sleeper hit for which he won a Filmfare Award for Best Male Debut .
He followed it with roles in several commercial failures before starring in Sooraj Barjatya 's top-grossing family drama Vivah -LRB- 2006 -RRB- .
Kapoor earned nominations for the Filmfare Award for Best Actor for portraying a troubled businessman in Imtiaz Ali 's romantic comedy Jab We Met -LRB- 2007 -RRB- and twin brothers in Vishal Bhardwaj 's caper thriller Kaminey -LRB- 2009 -RRB- .
After appearing in another series of box office flops , he starred in the action film R. .
.
Rajkumar -LRB- 2013 -RRB- his highest-grossing release .
In 2014 , Kapoor portrayed the Hamlet character in Bhardwaj 's acclaimed drama Haider , for which he won the Best Actor award at Filmfare .
Two years later , he played a drug abusing singer in the crime drama Udta Punjab , which won him the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actor .
Cited in the media as one of the most attractive Indian celebrities , Kapoor maintains his popularity despite a fluctuating career trajectory .
Initially recognised for portraying romantic roles , Kapoor has since taken on parts in action films and thrillers .
He is the recipient of several awards , including three Filmfare Awards .
In addition to acting , Kapoor supports charities , hosts award ceremonies , and has featured as a talent judge on the dance reality show Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa Reloaded -LRB- 2015 -RRB- .
Following a romantic relationship with the actress Kareena Kapoor , he married Mira Rajput , a student from New Delhi , with whom he has a daughter .