Shah Rukh Khan -LRB- born Shahrukh Khan ; 2 November 1965 -RRB- , also known as SRK , is an Indian film actor , producer and television personality .
Referred to in the media as the `` Baadshah of Bollywood '' , `` King of Bollywood '' or `` King Khan '' , he has appeared in more than 80 Bollywood films , and earned numerous accolades , including 14 Filmfare Awards .
Khan has a significant following in Asia and the Indian diaspora worldwide .
In terms of audience size and income , he has been described as one of the most successful film stars in the world .
Khan began his career with appearances in several television series in the late 1980s .
He made his Bollywood debut in 1992 with Deewana .
Early in his career , Khan was recognised for portraying villainous roles in the films Darr -LRB- 1993 -RRB- , Baazigar -LRB- 1993 -RRB- and Anjaam -LRB- 1994 -RRB- .
He then rose to prominence after starring in a series of romantic films , including Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge -LRB- 1995 -RRB- , Dil To Pagal Hai -LRB- 1997 -RRB- , Kuch Kuch Hota Hai -LRB- 1998 -RRB- , Mohabbatein -LRB- 2000 -RRB- and Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... -LRB- 2001 -RRB- .
He earned critical acclaim for his portrayal of an alcoholic in Devdas -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , a NASA scientist in Swades -LRB- 2004 -RRB- , a hockey coach in Chak De !
India -LRB- 2007 -RRB- and a man with Asperger syndrome in My Name Is Khan -LRB- 2010 -RRB- .
His highest-grossing films include the comedies Chennai Express -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and Happy New Year -LRB- 2014 -RRB- .
Many of his films display themes of Indian national identity and connections with diaspora communities , or gender , racial , social and religious differences and grievances .
For his contributions to film , the Government of India honoured him with the Padma Shri , and the Government of France awarded him both the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres and the Légion d'honneur .
As of 2015 , Khan is co-chairman of the motion picture production company Red Chillies Entertainment and its subsidiaries , and is the co-owner of the Indian Premier League cricket team Kolkata Knight Riders .
He is a frequent television presenter and stage show performer .
The media often label him as `` Brand SRK '' because of his many endorsement and entrepreneurship ventures .
Khan 's philanthropic endeavours have provided health care and disaster relief , and he was honoured with UNESCO 's Pyramide con Marni award in 2011 for his support of children 's education .
He regularly features in listings of the most influential people in Indian culture , and in 2008 , Newsweek named him one of their fifty most powerful people in the world .