Shania Twain , OC -LRB- -LSB- ʃəˈnaɪ.ə _ ˈtweɪn -RSB- born Eilleen Regina Edwards ; August 28 , 1965 -RRB- is a Canadian singer and songwriter .
Twain has sold over 85 million records , making her the best-selling female artist in the history of country music and one of the best-selling music artists of all time .
Her success garnered her several honorific titles including the `` Queen of Country Pop '' .
Twain 's second album , 1995 's The Woman in Me , brought her widespread success selling 20 million copies worldwide , spawning hits such as `` Any Man of Mine '' and earning her a Grammy Award .
Twain 's third album , Come On Over , became the best-selling studio album of all time by a female act in any genre and the best-selling country album , selling around 40 million copies worldwide .
Come On Over produced several singles , including `` You 're Still the One '' , `` From This Moment On '' and `` Man !
I Feel Like a Woman ! ''
, and earned Twain four Grammy Awards .
Her fourth and latest studio album , Up !
, was released in 2002 and , like her previous two albums , was also certified Diamond in the U.S. , spawning hits like `` I 'm Gon na Getcha Good ! ''
and `` Forever and for Always '' .
Twain has received five Grammy Awards , 27 BMI Songwriter awards , stars on Canada 's Walk of Fame and the Hollywood Walk of Fame , and an induction into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame .
She is the only female artist in history to have three consecutive albums certified Diamond by the RIAA .
Altogether , Twain is ranked as the 10th best-selling artist of the Nielsen SoundScan era .
In 2004 , Twain retired from performing and retreated to her home in Switzerland .
In her 2011 autobiography , she cited a weakening singing voice as the reason for not performing publicly .
When both her singing and speaking were affected , Twain consulted the Vanderbilt Dayani Center in Nashville .
Specialists discovered lesions on her vocal cords and diagnosed her with dysphonia , all treatable with careful rehabilitation .
In 2012 , Twain returned to the concert stage in her critically acclaimed show Still the One , exclusively at The Colosseum at Caesars Palace .
In 2015 , Twain returned to the road for what she has billed as her farewell tour .
The Rock This Country tour kicked off on June 5 , 2015 in Seattle , Washington and originally concluded in Fresno , California on August 23 but was extended to include additional dates and ended October 27 , 2015 in Kelowna , British Columbia , Canada .