Shingles , also known as herpes zoster , is a viral disease characterized by a painful skin rash with blisters in a localized area .
Typically the rash occurs in a single stripe either on the left or right of the body or face .
Two to four days before the rash occurs there may be tingling or local pain in the area .
Otherwise there are typically few symptoms .
The rash usually heals within two to four weeks ; however , some people develop ongoing nerve pain which can last for months or years , a condition called postherpetic neuralgia .
In those with poor immune function the rash may occur widely .
If the rash involves the eye , vision loss may occur .
Shingles is due to a reactivation of varicella zoster virus -LRB- VZV -RRB- within a person 's body .
Chickenpox is due to an initial infection with VZV .
Once chickenpox has resolved , the virus may remain inactive in nerve cells .
When it reactivates it travels from the nerve body to the endings in the skin producing blisters .
Risk factors for reactivation include old age , poor immune function , and having had chickenpox before 18 months of age .
How the virus remains in the body or subsequently re-activates is not well understood .
Exposure to the virus in the blisters can cause chickenpox in someone who has not had it before but will not trigger shingles .
Diagnosis is typically based on a person 's signs and symptoms .
Varicella zoster virus is not the same as herpes simplex virus ; however , they belong to the same family of viruses .
The shingles vaccine decreases the chance of shingles by about half in those between the ages of 50 and 80 .
It also decreases rates of postherpetic neuralgia , and if an outbreak occurs , its severity .
After 80 the vaccine is still effective , just less so .
It contains the same material as the varicella vaccine , just at a higher dose .
If shingles develops , antiviral medications such as aciclovir can reduce the severity and duration of disease if started within 72 hours of the appearance of the rash .
Evidence does not show a significant effect of antivirals or steroids on rates of postherpetic neuralgia .
Paracetamol , NSAIDs , or opioids may be used to help with the acute pain .
It is estimated that about a third of people develop shingles at some point in their life .
While more common among older people , children may also get the disease .
The number of new cases per year ranges from 1.2 -- 3.4 per 1,000 among healthy individuals to 3.9 -- 11.8 per 1,000 among those older than 65 years of age .
About half of those living to age 85 will have at least one attack , and less than 5 % will have more than one attack .
The disease has been recognized since ancient times .