The Siege of Fort Stanwix -LRB- also known at the time as Fort Schuyler -RRB- began on August 2 , 1777 , and ended August 22 .
Fort Stanwix , in the western part of the Mohawk River Valley , was then the primary defense point for the Continental Army against British and Indian forces aligned against them in the American Revolutionary War .
The fort was occupied by Continental Army forces from New York and Massachusetts under the command of Colonel Peter Gansevoort .
The besieging force was composed of British regulars , American Loyalists , Hessian soldiers from Hesse-Hanau , and Indians , under the command of British Brigadier General Barry St. Leger and the Iroquois leader Joseph Brant .
St. Leger 's expedition was a diversion in support of General John Burgoyne 's campaign to gain control of the Hudson River Valley to the east .
One attempt at relief was thwarted early in the siege when a force of New York militia under Nicholas Herkimer was stopped in the August 6 Battle of Oriskany by a detachment of St. Leger 's forces .
While that battle did not involve the fort 's garrison , some of its occupants sortied and raided the nearly empty Indian and Loyalist camps , which was a blow to the morale of St. Leger 's Indian support .
They killed some Seneca .
The siege was finally broken when American reinforcements under the command of Benedict Arnold neared , and Arnold used a ruse , with the assistance of Herkimer 's relative Hon Yost Schuyler , to convince the besiegers that a much larger force was arriving .
This misinformation , combined with the departure of Indian fighters not interested in siege warfare and upset over their losses from the raids , led St. Leger to abandon the effort and retreat .
St. Leger 's failure to advance on Albany contributed to Burgoyne 's surrender following the Battles of Saratoga in October 1777 .
Although St. Leger reached Fort Ticonderoga in late September , he was too late to aid Burgoyne .
The first official US flag was flown during battle on August 3 , 1777 , at Fort Schuyler .
The Continental Congress adopted the following resolution on June 14 , 1777 : `` Resolved , that the flag of the United States be thirteen stripes , alternate red and white ; that the union be thirteen stars , white , on a blue field , representing a new constellation . ''
There was a delay in displaying this flag .
The resolution was not signed by the secretary of the Congress until September 3 , though it was previously printed in the newspapers .
Massachusetts reinforcements to Fort Schuyler brought news of the adoption by Congress of the official flag .
Soldiers cut up their shirts to make the white stripes ; scarlet material was secured from red flannel petticoats of officers ' wives , while material for the blue union was secured from Capt. Abraham Swartwout 's blue cloth coat .
A voucher shows that Congress paid Capt. Swartwout for his coat for the flag .