Sikhism -LRB- -LSB- ˈsikᵻzəm -RSB- -RRB- , or Sikhi -LRB- ਸਿ ਖੀ , -LSB- ˈsɪkːʰiː -RSB- , from Sikh , meaning a `` disciple '' , or a `` learner '' -RRB- , is a panentheistic religion that originated in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent about the end of the 15th century .
It is one of the youngest of the major world religions .
The fundamental beliefs of Sikhism , articulated in the sacred scripture Guru Granth Sahib , include faith and meditation on the name of the one creator , unity of all humankind , engaging in selfless service , striving for social justice for the benefit and prosperity of all , and honest conduct and livelihood while living a householder 's life .
Sikhism has 25-28 million adherents worldwide and is the ninth-largest religion in the world .
Sikhism is based on the spiritual teachings of Guru Nanak , the first Guru , and the ten successive Sikh gurus .
Guru Nanak established Kartarpur -LRB- Creator 's town -RRB- around 1520 and gathered the original core of the Sikh Panth -LRB- community -RRB- there .
After the death of the tenth Guru , Guru Gobind Singh , the Sikh scripture , Guru Granth Sahib , became the literal embodiment of the eternal , impersonal Guru , where the scripture 's word serves as the spiritual guide for Sikhs .
An Indian religion , Sikhism rejects claims that any particular religious tradition has a monopoly on Absolute Truth .
Sikhism emphasizes simran -LRB- meditation on the words of the Guru Granth Sahib -RRB- , that can be expressed musically through kirtan or internally through Nam Japo -LRB- repeat God 's name -RRB- as a means to feel God 's presence , and to have control over the `` Five Thieves '' -LRB- lust , rage , greed , attachment and conceit -RRB- .
Hand in hand , secular life is considered to be intertwined with the spiritual life .
Guru Nanak taught that living an `` active , creative , and practical life '' of `` truthfulness , fidelity , self-control and purity '' is above the metaphysical truth , and that the ideal man is one who `` establishes union with God , knows His Will , and carries out that Will '' .
Guru Hargobind , the sixth Sikh Guru , established the political/temporal -LRB- Miri -RRB- and spiritual -LRB- Piri -RRB- realms to be mutually coexistent .
The development of Sikhism was influenced by the Bhakti movement , however , Sikhism was not simply an extension of the Bhakti movement .
Sikhism developed while the region was being ruled by the Mughal Empire .
Two of the Sikh gurus -- Guru Arjan and Guru Tegh Bahadur , after they refused to convert to Islam , were tortured and executed by the Mughal rulers .
The Islamic era persecution of Sikhs triggered the founding of the Khalsa , as an order for freedom of conscience and religion .
A Sikh is expected to embody the qualities of a `` Sant-Sipāhī '' a saint-soldier .