Sikkim -LRB- -LSB- ˈsɪkᵻm -RSB- -RRB- is a northeastern state of India .
It borders China in its north and east , Bhutan in its east , Nepal in its west and the Indian state of West Bengal in its south .
Sikkim is also located close to the Siliguri Corridor near Bangladesh .
Sikkim is the least populous and second smallest among the Indian states .
A part of the Eastern Himalaya , Sikkim is notable for its biodiversity , including alpine and subtropical climates , as well as being a host to Kanchenjunga , the highest peak in India and third highest on Earth .
Sikkim 's capital and largest city is Gangtok .
Almost 35 % of the state is covered by the Khangchendzonga National Park .
The Kingdom of Sikkim was founded on the Silk Road by the Namgyal dynasty in the 17th century .
It was ruled by a Buddhist priest-king known as the Chogyal .
Once a vassal state of Qing China , it became a princely state of British India in 1890 .
After the People 's Republic of China invaded Tibet , Sikkim continued its protectorate status with the dominion and republic of India .
It enjoyed the highest literacy rate and per capita income among Himalayan states .
In 1975 , the Indian military deposed the Sikkimese monarchy .
A referendum in 1975 led to Sikkim joining India as its 22nd state .
Modern Sikkim is a multiethnic and multilingual Indian state .
Sikkim has 11 official languages : Nepali , Sikkimese , Lepcha , Tamang , Limbu , Newari , Rai , Gurung , Magar , Sunwar and English .
English is taught in schools and used in government documents .
The predominant religions are Hinduism and Vajrayana Buddhism .
Sikkim 's economy is largely dependent on agriculture and tourism , and the state had the third-smallest GDP among Indian states , although it is also among the fastest-growing .
Sikkim accounts for the largest share of cardamom production in India , and is the world 's second largest producer of the spice after Guatemala .
Sikkim has the highest share of agricultural land dedicated to organic farming in India .
It is also among India 's most environmentally conscious states , having banned plastic water bottles and styrofoam products .