Sindh -LSB- sɪnd -RSB- -LRB- سنڌ ; -LSB- -RRB- is one of the four provinces of Pakistan , in the southeast of the country .
Historically home to the Sindhi people , it is also locally known as the Mehran .
It was formerly known as Sind until 1956 .
Sindh is the third largest province of Pakistan by area , and second largest province by population after Punjab .
Sindh is bordered by Balochistan province to the west , and Punjab province to the north .
Sindh also borders the Indian states of Gujarat and Rajasthan to the east , and Arabian Sea to the south .
Sindh 's landscape consists mostly of alluvial plains flanking the Indus River , the Thar desert in the eastern portion of the province closest to the border with India , and the Kirthar Mountains in the western part of Sindh .
Sindh 's climate is noted for hot summers and mild winters .
The provincial capital of Sindh is Pakistan 's largest city and financial hub , Karachi .
Sindh has Pakistan 's second largest economy with Karachi being its capital that hosts the headquarters of several multinational banks .
Sindh is home to a large portion of Pakistan 's industrial sector and contains two of Pakistan 's commercial seaports -- Port Bin Qasim and the Karachi Port .
The remainder of Sindh has an agriculture based economy , and produces fruit , food consumer items , and vegetables for the consumption other parts of the country .
Sindh is also the centre of Pakistan 's pharmaceutical industry .
Sindh is known for its distinct culture which is strongly influenced by Sufism , an important marker of Sindhi identity for both Hindus -LRB- Sindh has Pakistan 's highest percentage of Hindu residents -RRB- .
and Muslims in the province .
Several important Sufi shrines are located throughout the province which attract millions of annual devotees .
Sindh 's capital , Karachi , is Pakistan 's most ethnically diverse city , with Muhajirs , or descendants of those who migrated to Pakistan from India after 1947 and throughout the 1950s and 1960s , making up the majority of the population .
Karachi and other urban centres of Sindh have seen ethnic tensions between the native Sindhis and the Muhajirs boil over into violence on several occasions .
Sindh is home to two UNESCO World Heritage Sites - the Historical Monuments at Makli , and the Archaeological Ruins at Moenjodaro .