Singapore -LRB- -LSB- ˈsɪŋgəpɔr -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Republic of Singapore , sometimes referred to as the Lion City , the Garden City or the Little Red Dot , is a sovereign city-state in Southeast Asia .
It lies one degree -LRB- 137 km -RRB- north of the equator , at the southern tip of peninsular Malaysia , with Indonesia 's Riau Islands to the south .
Singapore 's territory consists of one main island along with 62 other islets .
Since independence , extensive land reclamation has increased its total size by 23 % -LRB- 130 km2 -RRB- , and its greening policy has covered the densely populated island with tropical flora , parks and gardens .
Stamford Raffles founded colonial Singapore in 1819 as a trading post of the East India Company ; after its collapse and the eventual establishment of the British Raj , the islands were ceded to Britain and became part of its Straits Settlements in 1826 .
During the Second World War , Singapore was occupied by Japan .
It gained independence from the UK in 1963 by federating with other former British territories to form Malaysia , but separated two years later over ideological differences , becoming a sovereign nation in 1965 .
After early years of turbulence , and despite lacking natural resources and a hinterland , the nation developed rapidly as an Asian Tiger economy , based on external trade and its workforce .
Singapore is a global commerce , finance and transport hub .
Its standings include : the most `` technology-ready '' nation -LRB- WEF -RRB- , top International-meetings city -LRB- UIA -RRB- , city with `` best investment potential '' -LRB- BERI -RRB- , second-most competitive country , third-largest foreign exchange market , third-largest financial centre , third-largest oil refining and trading centre , and the second-busiest container port .
The country has also been identified as a tax haven .
Singapore ranks 5th on the UN Human Development Index and the 3rd highest GDP per capita .
It is ranked highly in education , healthcare , life expectancy , quality of life , personal safety , and housing .
Although income inequality is high , 90 % of homes are owner-occupied .
38 % of Singapore 's 5.6 million residents are permanent residents and other foreign nationals .
There are four official languages : English -LRB- common and first language -RRB- , Malay , Mandarin , Tamil ; almost all Singaporeans are bilingual .
Singapore is a unitary multiparty parliamentary republic , with a Westminster system of unicameral parliamentary government .
The People 's Action Party has won every election since self-government in 1959 .
The dominance of the PAP , coupled with a low level of press freedom and restrictions on civil liberties and political rights , has led to Singapore being classified by some as a semi-authoritarian regime .
One of the five founding members of the ASEAN , Singapore is also the host of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation -LRB- APEC -RRB- Secretariat , and a member of the East Asia Summit , Non-Aligned Movement , and the Commonwealth of Nations .