Skopje -LRB- Скопје , -LSB- ˈskɔpjɛ -RSB- -RRB- is the capital and largest city of the Republic of Macedonia .
It is the country 's political , cultural , economic , and academic center .
It was known in the Roman period under the name Scupi .
The territory of Skopje has been inhabited since at least 4000 BC ; remains of Neolithic settlements have been found within the old Kale Fortress that overlooks the modern city centre .
On the eve of the 1st century AD , the settlement was seized by the Romans and became a military camp .
When the Roman Empire was divided into eastern and western halves in 395 AD , Scupi came under Byzantine rule from Constantinople .
During much of the early medieval period , the town was contested between the Byzantines and the Bulgarian Empire , whose capital it was between 972 and 992 .
From 1282 , the town was part of the Serbian Empire and acted as its capital city from 1346 to 1371 .
In 1392 , the city was conquered by the Ottoman Turks who called the town Üsküp .
The town stayed under Turkish control for over 500 years , serving as the capital of pashasanjak of Üsküb and later the Vilayet of Kosovo .
At that time the city was famous for its oriental architecture .
In 1912 , it was annexed by the Kingdom of Serbia during the Balkan Wars and after the First World War the city became part of the newly formed Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes -LRB- Kingdom of Yugoslavia -RRB- .
In the Second World War the city was conquered by the Bulgarian Army , which was part of the Axis powers .
In 1944 , it became the capital city of Democratic Macedonia -LRB- later Socialist Republic of Macedonia -RRB- , which was a federal state , part of Democratic Federal Yugoslavia -LRB- later Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia -RRB- .
The city developed rapidly after World War II , but this trend was interrupted in 1963 when it was hit by a disastrous earthquake .
In 1991 , it became the capital city of an independent Macedonia .
Skopje is located on the upper course of the Vardar River , and is located on a major north-south Balkan route between Belgrade and Athens .
It is a center for metal-processing , chemical , timber , textile , leather , and printing industries .
Industrial development of the city has been accompanied by development of the trade , logistics , and banking sectors , as well as an emphasis on the fields of transportation , culture and sport .
According to the last official count from 2002 , Skopje has a population of 506,926 inhabitants ; according to two more recent unofficial estimates , the city has a population of 668,518 or 491,000 inhabitants .