Slovakia -LRB- listen -RRB- , is a landlocked country in Central Europe .
It is bordered by the Czech Republic and Austria to the west , Poland to the north , Ukraine to the east and Hungary to the south .
Slovakia 's territory spans about 49000 km2 and is mostly mountainous .
The population is over 5 million and comprises mostly ethnic Slovaks .
The capital and largest city is Bratislava .
The official language is Slovak .
The Slavs arrived in the territory of present-day Slovakia in the 5th and 6th centuries .
In the 7th century , they played a significant role in the creation of Samo 's Empire and in the 9th century established the Principality of Nitra .
In the 10th century , the territory was integrated into the Kingdom of Hungary , which itself became part of the Ottoman Empire and the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
After World War I and the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire , the Slovaks and Czechs established Czechoslovakia .
A separate -LRB- First -RRB- Slovak Republic -LRB- 1939 -- 1945 -RRB- existed in World War II as a client state of Nazi Germany .
In 1945 , Czechoslovakia was re-established under Communist rule as a Soviet satellite .
In 1989 the Velvet Revolution ended authoritarian Communist rule in Czechoslovakia .
Slovakia became an independent state on 1 January 1993 after the peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia , sometimes known as the Velvet Divorce .
Slovakia is a high-income advanced economy with a very high Human Development Index , a very high standard of living and performs favourably in measurements of civil liberties , press freedom , internet freedom , democratic governance and peacefulness .
The country maintains a combination of market economy with a comprehensive social security system .
Citizens of Slovakia are provided with universal health care , free education and one of the longest paid maternity leave in the OECD .
The country joined the European Union in 2004 and the Eurozone on 1 January 2009 .
Slovakia is also a member of the Schengen Area , NATO , the United Nations , the OECD , the WTO , CERN , the OSCE , the Council of Europe and the Visegrád Group .
The Slovak economy is one of the fastest growing economies in Europe and 3rd fastest in eurozone .
Its legal tender , the Euro , is the world 's 2nd most traded currency .
Although regional income inequality is high , 90 % of citizens own their homes .
In 2016 , Slovak citizens had visa-free or visa-on-arrival access to 165 countries and territories , ranking the Slovak passport 11th in the world .
Slovakia is the world 's largest per-capita car producer with a total of 1,040,000 cars manufactured in the country in 2016 alone and the 7th largest car producer in the European Union .
The car industry represents 43 % of Slovakia 's industrial output , and a quarter of its exports .