Cordozar Calvin Broadus , Jr. -LRB- born October 20 , 1971 -RRB- , known professionally as Snoop Dogg -LRB- sometimes shortened to Snoop and formerly called Snoop Doggy Dogg and Snoop Lion -RRB- , is an American rapper and actor from Long Beach , California .
His music career began in 1992 when he was discovered by Dr. Dre of N.W.A , and as a result was prominently featured throughout Dr. Dre 's solo debut album , The Chronic -LRB- 1992 -RRB- .
He has since sold over twenty-three million albums in the United States and thirty-five million albums worldwide .
Snoop 's debut album , Doggystyle , was released in 1993 under Death Row Records , debuting at number one on both the Billboard 200 and Billboard Top R&B / Hip-Hop Albums charts .
Selling almost a million copies in the first week of its release , Doggystyle became certified 4 × platinum in 1994 and spawned several hit singles , including `` What 's My Name ? ''
and `` Gin & Juice '' .
In 1994 Snoop released a soundtrack on Death Row Records for the short film Murder Was The Case , starring himself .
His second album Tha Doggfather -LRB- 1996 -RRB- , also debuted at number one on both charts with `` Snoop 's Upside Ya Head '' , as the lead single .
The album was certified double platinum in 1997 .
After leaving Death Row Records , Snoop signed with No Limit Records , where he recorded his next three albums .
Da Game Is to Be Sold , Not to Be Told -LRB- 1998 -RRB- , No Limit Top Dogg -LRB- 1999 -RRB- , and Tha Last Meal -LRB- 2000 -RRB- .
Snoop then signed with Priority/Capitol/EMI Records in 2002 , where he released Paid tha Cost to Be da Boss .
He then signed with Geffen Records in 2004 for his next three albums R&G -LRB- Rhythm & Gangsta -RRB- : The Masterpiece , Tha Blue Carpet Treatment , and Ego Trippin ' .
Malice 'n Wonderland -LRB- 2009 -RRB- , and Doggumentary -LRB- 2011 -RRB- , were released on Priority .
Snoop Dogg has starred in motion pictures and hosted several television shows , including Doggy Fizzle Televizzle , Snoop Dogg 's Father Hood , and Dogg After Dark .
He also coaches a youth football league and high school football team .
In September 2009 , Snoop was hired by EMI as the chairman of a reactivated Priority Records .
In 2012 , after a trip to Jamaica , Snoop announced a conversion to the Rastafari movement and a new alias , Snoop Lion .
Under the new moniker , he released a reggae album , Reincarnated , and a documentary film of the same name , of his Jamaican experience , in early 2013 .
His fourteenth solo studio album , Coolaid , was released in July 2016 .
Snoop Dogg holds the dubious distinction of having seventeen Grammy nominations without a win .
In March 2016 , the night before WrestleMania 32 in Arlington , Texas , Snoop was inducted into the celebrity wing of the WWE Hall of Fame having made several appearances for the company , including as Master of Ceremonies during a match at Wrestlemania XXIV .