Social anxiety disorder -LRB- SAD -RRB- , also known as social phobia , is an anxiety disorder characterized by a significant amount of fear in one or more social situations , causing considerable distress and impaired ability to function in at least some parts of daily life .
These fears can be triggered by perceived or actual scrutiny from others .
Physical symptoms often include excessive blushing , excess sweating , trembling , palpitations , and nausea .
Stammering may be present , along with rapid speech .
Panic attacks can also occur under intense fear and discomfort .
Some sufferers may use alcohol or other drugs to reduce fears and inhibitions at social events .
It is common for sufferers of social phobia to self-medicate in this fashion , especially if they are undiagnosed , untreated , or both ; this can lead to alcoholism , eating disorders or other kinds of substance abuse .
SAD is sometimes referred to as an illness of lost opportunities where `` individuals make major life choices to accommodate their illness '' .
According to ICD-10 guidelines , the main diagnostic criteria of social phobia are fear of being the focus of attention , or fear of behaving in a way that will be embarrassing or humiliating , avoidance and anxiety symptoms .
Standardized rating scales can be used to screen for social anxiety disorder and measure the severity of anxiety .
The first line treatment for social anxiety disorder is cognitive behavioral therapy -LRB- CBT -RRB- with medications recommended only in those who are not interested in therapy .
CBT is effective in treating social phobia , whether delivered individually or in a group setting .
The cognitive and behavioral components seek to change thought patterns and physical reactions to anxiety-inducing situations .
The attention given to social anxiety disorder has significantly increased since 1999 with the approval and marketing of drugs for its treatment .
Prescribed medications include several classes of antidepressants : selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors -LRB- SSRIs -RRB- , serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors -LRB- SNRIs -RRB- , and monoamine oxidase inhibitors -LRB- MAOIs -RRB- .
Other commonly used medications include beta blockers and benzodiazepines .
It is the most common anxiety disorder with up to 10 % of people being affected at some point in their life .