Sociology is the study of social behavior or society , including its origins , development , organization , networks , and institutions .
It is a social science that uses various methods of empirical investigation and critical analysis to develop a body of knowledge about social order , disorder , and change .
Many sociologists aim to conduct research that may be applied directly to social policy and welfare , while others focus primarily on refining the theoretical understanding of social processes .
Subject matter ranges from the micro-sociology level of individual agency and interaction to the macro level of systems and the social structure .
The traditional focuses of sociology include social stratification , social class , social mobility , religion , secularization , law , sexuality and deviance .
As all spheres of human activity are affected by the interplay between social structure and individual agency , sociology has gradually expanded its focus to further subjects , such as health , medical , military and penal institutions , the Internet , education , social capital and the role of social activity in the development of scientific knowledge .
The range of social scientific methods has also expanded .
Social researchers draw upon a variety of qualitative and quantitative techniques .
The linguistic and cultural turns of the mid-twentieth century led to increasingly interpretative , hermeneutic , and philosophic approaches towards the analysis of society .
Conversely , the end of the 1990s and the beginning of 2000s have seen the rise of new analytically , mathematically and computationally rigorous techniques , such as agent-based modelling and social network analysis .
Social research informs politicians and policy makers , educators , planners , legislators , administrators , developers , business magnates , managers , social workers , non-governmental organizations , non-profit organizations , and people interested in resolving social issues in general .
There is often a great deal of crossover between social research , market research , and other statistical fields .