Somalia -LRB- -LSB- səˈmɑːliə , _ soʊ - , _ - ljə -RSB- ; Soomaaliya الصومال -RRB- , officially the Federal Republic of Somalia -LRB- Jamhuuriyadda Federaalka Soomaaliya , جمهورية الصومال الفيدرالية -RRB- , is a country located in the Horn of Africa .
It is bordered by Ethiopia to the west , Djibouti to the northwest , the Gulf of Aden to the north , the Indian Ocean to the east , and Kenya to the southwest .
Somalia has the longest coastline on Africa 's mainland , and its terrain consists mainly of plateaus , plains and highlands .
Climatically , hot conditions prevail year-round , with periodic monsoon winds and irregular rainfall .
Somalia has an estimated population of around 16.3 million .
Around 85 % of its residents are ethnic Somalis , who have historically inhabited the northern part of the country .
Ethnic minorities are largely concentrated in the southern regions .
The official languages of Somalia are Somali and Arabic , both of which belong to the Afroasiatic family .
Most people in the country are Muslim , with the majority being Sunni .
In antiquity , Somalia was an important commercial centre .
It is among the most probable locations of the fabled ancient Land of Punt .
During the Middle Ages , several powerful Somali empires dominated the regional trade , including the Ajuran Empire , the Adal Sultanate , the Warsangali Sultanate , and the Geledi Sultanate .
In the late 19th century , through a succession of treaties with these kingdoms , the British and Italian empires gained control of parts of the coast and established the colonies of British Somaliland and Italian Somaliland .
In the interior , Mohammed Abdullah Hassan 's Dervish State repelled the British Empire four times and forced it to retreat to the coastal region , before succumbing to defeat in 1920 by British airpower .
The toponym Somalia was coined by the Italian explorer Luigi Robecchi Bricchetti -LRB- 1855 -- 1926 -RRB- .
Italy acquired full control of the northeastern , central and southern parts of the area after successfully waging the so-called Campaign of the Sultanates against the ruling Majeerteen Sultanate and Sultanate of Hobyo .
Italian occupation lasted until 1941 , yielding to British military administration .
British Somaliland would remain a protectorate , while Italian Somaliland in 1949 became a United Nations Trusteeship under Italian administration , the Trust Territory of Somaliland .
In 1960 , the two regions united to form the independent Somali Republic under a civilian government .
The Supreme Revolutionary Council seized power in 1969 and established the Somali Democratic Republic .
Led by Mohamed Siad Barre , this government later collapsed in 1991 as the Somali Civil War broke out .
Various armed factions began competing for influence in the power vacuum , particularly in the south .
During this period , due to the absence of a central government , Somalia was a `` failed state '' , and residents returned to customary and religious law in most regions .
A few autonomous regions , including the Somaliland and Puntland administrations emerged in the north .
The early 2000s saw the creation of fledgling interim federal administrations .
The Transitional National Government -LRB- TNG -RRB- was established in 2000 , followed by the formation of the Transitional Federal Government -LRB- TFG -RRB- in 2004 , which reestablished national institutions such as the military .
In 2006 , the TFG , assisted by Ethiopian troops , assumed control of most of the nation 's southern conflict zones from the newly formed Islamic Courts Union -LRB- ICU -RRB- .
The ICU subsequently splintered into more radical groups such as Al-Shabaab , which battled the TFG and its AMISOM allies for control of the region .
By mid-2012 , the insurgents had lost most of the territory that they had seized .
In 2011 -- 2012 , a political process providing benchmarks for the establishment of permanent democratic institutions was launched .
Within this administrative framework a new provisional constitution was passed in August 2012 , which reformed Somalia as a federation .
Following the end of the TFG 's interim mandate the same month , the Federal Government of Somalia , the first permanent central government in the country since the start of the civil war , was formed and a period of reconstruction began in Mogadishu .
Somalia has maintained an informal economy , mainly based on livestock , remittances from Somalis working abroad , and telecommunications .