is a fictional character and the protagonist of Square Enix 's Kingdom Hearts video game series .
Introduced in the first Kingdom Hearts game in 2002 , Sora is portrayed as a cheerful teenager who lives in the Destiny Islands and has been best friends with Riku and Kairi since childhood .
When they plan to go on a journey to see other worlds , they are separated by creatures known as the Heartless .
While fighting against them , Sora obtains a weapon called the Keyblade .
Donald Duck and Goofy then recruit him in their journey across various worlds to aid King Mickey while Sora searches for his friends .
Along the way , the trio protects the worlds they visit from various villains .
In Kingdom Hearts II , Sora searches for Riku and fights against Organization XIII who , like Ansem the Seeker of Darkness from the first game , are attempting to seize Kingdom Hearts for their own .
Sora has also made supporting appearances in other games from the series , and reprised his role in manga and light novel adaptations of the games .
Sora was originally designed by Kingdom Hearts series director and character designer Tetsuya Nomura during a discussion between Disney and Square about who should be the protagonist of the series .
Wanting an original character , Nomura made various sketches of Sora until the design met the approval of Disney .
Nomura came to regard Sora as his favorite character that he had designed , and pushed for the character to have a leading role in the Kingdom Hearts story in spite of the character 's youth .
Throughout the series , Sora has been voiced by Haley Joel Osment in the English version and Miyu Irino in the Japanese version .
For his depiction as a child in the prequel Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep , Sora was voiced by Luke Manriquez and Takuto Yoshinaga in English and Japanese , respectively .
Sora 's character has received generally positive critical response due to his warm personality and adventurous spirit .
His personal and martial growth in the series also received praise , especially in his appearance in Kingdom Hearts II .
Additionally , Sora has ranked high on various video game character popularity polls .