Southport -LRB- -LSB- ˈsaʊθpɔrt -RSB- -RRB- is a large seaside town in Merseyside , England .
At the 2001 census , it had a population of 90,336 , making it the eleventh most populous settlement in North West England .
Southport lies on the Irish Sea coast and is fringed to the north by the Ribble estuary .
The town is 16.7 mi north of Liverpool and 14.8 mi southwest of Preston .
Historically part of Lancashire , the town was founded in 1792 when William Sutton , an innkeeper from Churchtown , built a bathing house at what now is the south end of Lord Street .
At that time , the area , known as South Hawes , was sparsely populated and dominated by sand dunes .
At the turn of the 19th century , the area became popular with tourists due to the easy access from the nearby Leeds and Liverpool Canal .
The rapid growth of Southport largely coincided with the Industrial Revolution and the Victorian era .
Town attractions include Southport Pier with its Southport Pier Tramway , the second longest seaside pleasure pier in the British Isles and Lord Street , an elegant tree-lined shopping street , once home of Napoleon III of France .
Extensive sand dunes stretch for several miles between Birkdale and Woodvale to the south of the town .
The Ainsdale sand dunes have been designated as a national nature reserve and a Ramsar site .
Local fauna include the Natterjack toad and the Sand lizard .
The town contains examples of Victorian architecture and town planning , on Lord Street and elsewhere .
A particular feature of the town is the extensive tree planting .
This was one of the conditions required by the Hesketh family when they made land available for development in the 19th century .
Hesketh Park at the northern end of the town is named after them , having been built on land donated by Rev. Charles Hesketh .
Southport today is still one of the most popular seaside resorts in the UK .
It hosts various events , including an annual air show on and over the beach , and the largest independent flower show in the UK , in Victoria Park .
The town is at the centre of England 's Golf Coast and has hosted the Open Championship at the Royal Birkdale Golf Club .