Stanley Kubrick -LRB- -LSB- ˈkuːbrɪk -RSB- July 26 , 1928 -- March 7 , 1999 -RRB- was an American film director , screenwriter , producer , cinematographer , editor , and photographer .
He is frequently cited as one of the greatest and most influential directors in cinematic history .
His films , which are mostly adaptations of novels or short stories , cover a wide range of genres , and are noted for their realism , dark humor , unique cinematography , extensive set designs , and evocative use of music .
Kubrick was born and raised in the Bronx , New York City , and attended William Howard Taft High School from 1941 to 1945 .
Although he only received average grades , Kubrick displayed a keen interest in literature , photography , and film from a young age , and taught himself all aspects of film production and directing after graduating from high school .
After working as a photographer for Look magazine in the late 1940s and early 1950s , he began making short films on a shoestring budget , and made his first major Hollywood film , The Killing , for United Artists in 1956 .
This was followed by two collaborations with Kirk Douglas , the war picture Paths of Glory -LRB- 1957 -RRB- and the historical epic Spartacus -LRB- 1960 -RRB- .
His reputation as a filmmaker in Hollywood grew , and he was approached by Marlon Brando to film what would become One-Eyed Jacks -LRB- 1961 -RRB- , though Brando eventually decided to direct it himself .
Creative differences arising from his work with Douglas and the film studios , a dislike of Hollywood , and a growing concern about crime in America prompted Kubrick to move to the United Kingdom in 1961 , where he spent most of the remainder of his life and career .
His home at Childwickbury Manor in Hertfordshire , which he shared with his wife Christiane , became his workplace , where he did his writing , research , editing , and management of production details .
This allowed him to have almost complete artistic control over his films , but with the rare advantage of having financial support from major Hollywood studios .
His first British productions were two films with Peter Sellers , Lolita -LRB- 1962 -RRB- and Dr. Strangelove -LRB- 1964 -RRB- .
A demanding perfectionist , Kubrick assumed control over most aspects of the filmmaking process , from direction and writing to editing , and took painstaking care with researching his films and staging scenes , working in close coordination with his actors and other collaborators .
He often asked for several dozen retakes of the same scene in a movie , which resulted in many conflicts with his casts .
Despite the resulting notoriety among actors , many of Kubrick 's films broke new ground in cinematography .
The scientific realism and innovative special effects of 2001 : A Space Odyssey -LRB- 1968 -RRB- were without precedent in the history of cinema , and the film earned him his only personal Oscar , for Best Visual Effects .
Steven Spielberg has referred to the film as his generation 's `` big bang '' , and it is regarded as one of the greatest films ever made .
For the 18th-century period film Barry Lyndon -LRB- 1975 -RRB- , Kubrick obtained lenses developed by Zeiss for NASA , to film scenes under natural candlelight .
With The Shining -LRB- 1980 -RRB- , he became one of the first directors to make use of a Steadicam for stabilized and fluid tracking shots .
While many of Kubrick 's films were controversial and initially received mixed reviews upon release -- particularly A Clockwork Orange -LRB- 1971 -RRB- , which Kubrick pulled from circulation in the UK following a mass media frenzy -- most were nominated for Oscars , Golden Globes , or BAFTA Awards , and underwent critical reevaluations .
His last film , Eyes Wide Shut , was completed shortly before his death in 1999 at the age of 70 .