Starrcade was an annual professional wrestling event , originally broadcast via closed-circuit television and eventually broadcast via pay-per-view television , held from 1983 to 2000 by the National Wrestling Alliance -LRB- NWA -RRB- and later World Championship Wrestling -LRB- WCW -RRB- .
Starrcade was regarded by the NWA and WCW as their flagship event of the year , much in the same vein that its rival , the World Wrestling Entertainment , regards WrestleMania .
As a result , the buildup to each Starrcade featured the largest feuds of the promotion .
From 1983 to 1987 , Starrcade was produced by Jim Crockett Promotions -LRB- JCP -RRB- , the dominant promotion of the NWA , and aired on Thanksgiving Day .
In 1987 , the WWF scheduled a pay-per-view of their own , Survivor Series , on Thanksgiving night and demanded exclusivity from cable providers on carriage of the event .
In order to prevent such a problem , Starrcade was moved to December the following year and the show was held around Christmas Day , mostly in the days following , beginning in 1988 .
Also in 1988 , JCP was sold to Turner Broadcasting due to financial problems and became WCW , though Starrcade was held under the NWA banner until 1990 .
From the 1960s to the 1980s , it was tradition for JCP to hold major professional wrestling events on Thanksgiving and Christmas , mostly at Greensboro Coliseum .
In 1983 , JCP created Starrcade as their supercard to continue the Thanksgiving tradition , and spread it across its territory on closed-circuit television .
It popularized broadcasting on closed-circuit television and was financially successful .
From 1987 , Starrcade was broadcast on pay-per-view , the first NWA event to do so .
The rights to the event now belong to WWE -LRB- formerly the World Wrestling Federation -RRB- .
In November 2008 , WWE 24/7 Classics aired a special as a celebration of the 25th anniversary of the event called The Essential Starrcade .
This five-part series counts down the top 25 matches in Starrcade history .
In January 2009 , WWE Home Video released Starrcade : The Essential Collection as a three disc DVD set .
With the launch of the WWE Network in 2014 all Starrcade shows became available on demand to Network subscribers .