Stars Dance is the solo debut studio album by American singer Selena Gomez .
It was released on July 19 , 2013 , by Hollywood Records .
Gomez began planning the project in 2012 , at which time she announced that her band Selena Gomez & the Scene would be taking an indefinite hiatus , and continued work into 2013 .
She has cited artists such as Britney Spears and Skrillex as influences on the record , which stylistically features EDM and electropop music .
Elements of dubstep , techno , disco and worldbeat have been noted on the album .
Gomez worked with producers such as Rock Mafia and The Cataracs on the album .
Upon its release , Stars Dance received generally mixed reviews from music critics .
While some complimented both Gomez 's maturing image and the album 's content both lyrically and vocally , the album was criticized for its electronic-heavy and somewhat `` generic '' production .
It is her first album to debut at number one on the Billboard 200 .
The album sold 97,000 copies in its first week of release in the country , making it her highest selling debut at the time .
This was later surpassed by her second studio effort , Revival -LRB- 2015 -RRB- , which sold 117,000 units in its first week .
It became her fourth top twenty entry in the United Kingdom , peaking at number fourteen .
As of May 2017 , the album has sold an estimated 407,000 copies in the United States , making it her lowest selling studio album to date in the country .
The album 's lead single , `` Come & Get It '' featured heavy electronic and worldbeat themes , became Gomez 's first top 10 entry in the United States , and entered the top ten in countries such as the United Kingdom , Ireland , and Canada , among others .
It was also successful on pop radio , reaching number-two on the Mainstream Top 40 chart .
The second single , `` Slow Down '' , failed to match the success of its predecessor , though did peak inside the Top 30 in the United States .
It was met with success on pop radio , reaching the top ten of the Mainstream Top 40 chart .
Gomez promoted the album through a number of high-profile performances , such as the 2013 Billboard Music Awards .
Gomez embarked on the Stars Dance Tour -LRB- 2013 -RRB- to further promote the release .