Star Trek is an American science fiction media franchise based on the television series created by Gene Roddenberry .
The first television series , simply called Star Trek and now referred to as The Original Series , debuted in 1966 and aired for three seasons on the television network NBC .
It followed the interstellar adventures of Captain James T. Kirk -LRB- William Shatner -RRB- and his crew aboard the starship USS Enterprise , a space exploration vessel , built by the interstellar federal republic United Federation of Planets in the twenty-third century .
The Star Trek canon of the franchise includes The Original Series , an animated series , four spin-off television series , its film franchise and an upcoming television series scheduled to debut in 2017 .
In creating Star Trek , Roddenberry was inspired by the Horatio Hornblower novels , the satirical book Gulliver 's Travels , and by works of western genre such as the television series Wagon Train .
These adventures continued in the short-lived Star Trek : The Animated Series and six feature films .
Four spin-off television series were eventually produced : Star Trek : The Next Generation followed the crew of a new starship Enterprise set a century after the original series ; Star Trek : Deep Space Nine and Star Trek : Voyager set contemporaneously with The Next Generation ; and Star Trek : Enterprise set before the original series in the early days of human interstellar travel .
The adventures of The Next Generation crew continued in four additional feature films .
In 2009 , the film franchise underwent a `` reboot '' set in an alternate timeline , or `` Kelvin Timeline '' , entitled simply Star Trek .
This film featured a new cast portraying younger versions of the crew from the original show ; their adventures were continued in the sequel film , Star Trek Into Darkness -LRB- 2013 -RRB- .
The thirteenth film feature and sequel , Star Trek Beyond -LRB- 2016 -RRB- , was released to coincide with the franchise 's 50th anniversary .
A new Star Trek TV series , entitled Star Trek : Discovery , is set to premiere on the digital platform CBS All Access .
Star Trek has been a cult phenomenon for decades .
Fans of the franchise are called Trekkies or Trekkers .
The franchise spans a wide range of spin-offs including games , figurines , novels , toys , and comics .
Star Trek had a themed attraction in Las Vegas that opened in 1998 and closed in September 2008 .
At least two museum exhibits of props travel the world .
The series has its own full-fledged constructed language , Klingon .
Several parodies have been made of Star Trek .
In addition , viewers have produced several fan productions .
As of July 2016 , the franchise had generated $ 10 billion in revenue , making Star Trek one of the highest-grossing media franchises of all time .
Star Trek is noted for its cultural influence beyond works of science fiction .
The franchise is also noted for its progressive civil rights stances .
The Original Series included one of television 's first multiracial casts .
Star Trek references may be found throughout popular culture from movies such as the submarine thriller Crimson Tide to the animated series South Park .