Star Wars : Episode II -- Attack of the Clones is a 2002 American epic space opera film directed by George Lucas and written by Lucas and Jonathan Hales .
It is the second installment of the Star Wars prequel trilogy , and stars Ewan McGregor , Natalie Portman , Hayden Christensen , Ian McDiarmid , Samuel L. Jackson , Christopher Lee , Temuera Morrison , Anthony Daniels , Kenny Baker , and Frank Oz .
The film is set ten years after the events in Star Wars : Episode I -- The Phantom Menace .
The galaxy is on the brink of civil war .
Led by a former Jedi named Count Dooku , thousands of planetary systems threaten to secede from the Galactic Republic .
After Senator Padmé Amidala evades assassination , Jedi apprentice Anakin Skywalker becomes her protector , while his mentor Obi-Wan Kenobi investigates the attempt on Padmé 's life .
Soon Anakin , Padmé , and Obi-Wan witness the onset of a new threat to the galaxy , the Clone Wars .
Development of Attack of the Clones began in March 2000 , after the release of The Phantom Menace .
By June 2000 , Lucas and Hales completed a draft of the script and principal photography took place from June to September 2000 .
The film crew primarily shot at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney , Australia , with additional footage filmed in Tunisia , Spain and Italy .
It was one of the first motion pictures shot completely on a high-definition digital 24-frame system .
The film premiered on May 16 , 2002 .
Some critics hailed it as an improvement over The Phantom Menace , while the visual effects , costume design , musical score , and Ewan McGregor 's performance as Obi-Wan Kenobi were all praised .
Despite this , critics lambasted the romance of Anakin and Padmé , the dialogue , most of the acting , and the film 's long runtime .
The film received positive reviews and was a financial success ; however , it also became the first Star Wars film to be out-grossed in its year of release , placing only third domestically and fourth internationally .
The film was released on VHS and DVD on November 12 , 2002 and was later released on Blu-ray on September 16 , 2011 .
Following Attack of the Clones , the third and final film of the prequel trilogy , Star Wars : Episode III -- Revenge of the Sith , premiered in 2005 .