Stephanie Lynn `` Stevie '' Nicks -LRB- born May 26 , 1948 -RRB- is an American singer-songwriter who is often regarded as the Queen of Rock n ' Roll .
Nicks is best known for her work as the front-woman of Fleetwood Mac and for her chart-topping solo career .
She is known for her distinctive voice , mystical visual style , and symbolic lyrics .
Collectively , her work both as a member of Fleetwood Mac and as a solo artist has produced over 40 top-50 hits and sold over 140 million records , making her one of the best selling music acts of all time with Fleetwood Mac .
Her influence in fashion , music and musical performance is widely acknowledged ; and as such , she has been named one of music 's top 55 `` Greatest Songwriters of All Time '' , and as one of the world 's top `` 100 Greatest Singers of All Time '' by Rolling Stone .
As a member of Fleetwood Mac , she was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1998 .
She has garnered eight Grammy Award nominations and two American Music Award nominations as a solo artist .
She has won numerous awards with Fleetwood Mac , including a Grammy Award and five Grammy Award nominations .
Nicks joined Fleetwood Mac in 1975 along with her then boyfriend , Lindsey Buckingham .
Rumours , Fleetwood Mac 's second album after the incorporation of Nicks and Buckingham , was the best-selling album of the year of its release , and to date , has made sales of over 40 million copies worldwide , making it the fifth-highest selling studio album of all time .
The album remained at number one on the American albums chart for 31 weeks and reached Number One in various countries worldwide .
The album won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 1978 .
it produced four U.S. top-10 singles , with Nicks ' `` Dreams '' being the band 's first and only U.S. number-one hit .
In 1981 , while remaining a member of Fleetwood Mac , Nicks began her solo career , releasing the album Bella Donna , which topped the Billboard album charts and reached platinum status less than three months after its release , and has since been certified quadruple-platinum .
She has released a total of eight solo studio albums to date , with her most recent titled 24 Karat Gold : Songs from the Vault , released in October 2014 .
During her solo career , she has had a close working relationship with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers .
They served as a backing band for several tracks on each of her solo albums , and the two have toured and performed together frequently over the past three decades .
The song `` Stop Draggin ' My Heart Around '' , performed by Nicks and Petty , was one of the biggest hits for either artist .