Steven Tyler -LRB- born Steven Victor Tallarico ; March 26 , 1948 -RRB- is an American singer-songwriter , multi-instrumentalist , and former television music competition judge , best known as the lead singer of the Boston-based rock band Aerosmith , in which he also plays the harmonica , and occasional piano and percussion .
He is known as the `` Demon of Screamin ' '' due to his high screams and his wide vocal range .
He is also known for his on-stage acrobatics .
During his high-energy performances , Tyler usually dresses in bright , colorful outfits with his trademark scarves hanging from his microphone stand .
In the 1970s , Tyler rose to prominence as the lead singer of Aerosmith , which released such milestone hard rock albums as Toys in the Attic and Rocks , along with a string of hit singles , including `` Dream On '' , `` Sweet Emotion '' and `` Walk This Way '' .
In the late 1970s and early 1980s , Tyler had a heavy drug and alcohol addiction and the band 's popularity waned .
Tyler and bandmate Joe Perry became known as the `` Toxic Twins '' due to their drug abuse .
In 1986 , Tyler completed drug rehabilitation and Aerosmith rose to prominence again when Tyler and Perry joined Run -- D.M.C. for a re-make of the classic Aerosmith song `` Walk This Way '' , which became a Top 5 hit .
Aerosmith subsequently launched a remarkable comeback with the multi-platinum albums Permanent Vacation , Pump , Get a Grip and Nine Lives , which produced a combined thirteen Top 40 singles and won the band numerous awards .
During this time , the band embarked on their longest and most extensive concert tours , promoted their singles with conceptual music videos and made notable appearances in television , film and video games .
In the wake of this success , Tyler emerged as one of the most enduring rock icons .
Since the late 1980s , he has embarked on several solo endeavors including guest appearances on other artists ' music -LRB- working with artists as diverse as Alice Cooper , Mötley Crüe , Santana , Pink and Keith Anderson -RRB- , film and TV roles -LRB- including as a judge on American Idol and several cameo and guest appearances in other programs and films -RRB- , authoring a bestselling book and solo work -LRB- including the Top 40 hit single '' -LRB- It -RRB- Feels So Good '' in 2011 -RRB- .
While tension with his Aerosmith bandmates boiled in 2009 and 2010 after he fell off the stage at a concert , had a relapse with prescription drugs -LRB- which he successfully received treatment for in 2009 -RRB- , and signed on to American Idol without telling his bandmates , Tyler has continued to record music and perform with Aerosmith , after more than 46 years in the band .
In May 2015 , Tyler released the country single `` Love Is Your Name '' , followed by the second single `` Red , White & You '' in January 2016 ; his debut solo album , We 're All Somebody from Somewhere , was released on July 15 , 2016 .
Tyler is included among Rolling Stone 's 100 Greatest Singers .
He was ranked third on Hit Parader 's Top 100 Metal Vocalists of All Time .
In 2001 , he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame with Aerosmith and in 2013 , Tyler and his songwriting partner Joe Perry received the ASCAP Founders Award and were inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame .