is a Japanese animation studio and production enterprise .
It is a subsidiary of Bandai Namco Holdings .
Its former name was Nippon Sunrise , and prior to that , Sunrise Studios .
Its headquarters is located in Suginami , Tokyo .
Among Japan 's largest and most famous studios , Sunrise is renowned for several critically lauded and popular original anime series , such as Gundam , Cowboy Bebop , Space Runaway Ideon , Armored Trooper Votoms , Yoroiden Samurai Troopers , Future GPX Cyber Formula , Crush Gear Turbo , The Vision of Escaflowne , Love Live School Idol Project , Witch Hunter Robin , My-HiME , My-Otome , Code Geass : Lelouch of the Rebellion , Tiger & Bunny , Cross Ange : Rondo of Angel and Dragon , as well as its numerous adaptations of acclaimed light novels including Dirty Pair , Horizon in the Middle of Nowhere and Accel World , and manga such as City Hunter , InuYasha , Outlaw Star , Yakitate !!
Japan , Planetes , Keroro Gunso , Gin Tama , Kekkaishi and several others .
Many of Sunrise 's original anime include similar themes , including mecha and masked identities accompanied with fluid animation .
Because of the fluidity and high degree of details on much of their works , fans refer to their animation works as `` Sunrise Smooth '' .
Most of their works are mostly original titles created in-house by their creative staffs that went into a collective pseudonym called Hajime Yatate .
They also previously operated a now defunct video game studio of their own named Sunrise Interactive .
Sunrise also launched their own light novel publication titled Yatate Bunko Imprint on September 30 , 2016 aimed to publish new original titles and also to supplemment their already existing franchises with new materials .
Anime created by Sunrise that have won the Animage Anime Grand Prix prize are Mobile Suit Gundam in 1979 and the first half of 1980 , Space Runaway Ideon in the second half of 1980 , Crusher Joe -LRB- co-production with Studio Nue -RRB- in 1983 , Dirty Pair in 1985 , Future GPX Cyber Formula in 1991 , Gundam SEED in 2002 , Gundam SEED Destiny in 2004 and 2005 , Code Geass : Lelouch of the Rebellion in 2006 and 2007 and Code Geass R2 in 2008 , thus making Sunrise as the studio that won the most number of Animage Awards .