Superman -LRB- informally titled Superman : The Movie in some listings and reference sources -RRB- is a 1978 superhero film directed by Richard Donner and based on the DC Comics character of the same name .
The film is a British , Swiss , Panamanian and American joint venture , produced by Warner Bros. , Film Export A.G. , Dovemead Limited and International Film Productions .
Superman stars Marlon Brando , Gene Hackman , Christopher Reeve , Margot Kidder , Glenn Ford , Phyllis Thaxter , Jackie Cooper , Trevor Howard , Marc McClure , Terence Stamp , Valerie Perrine , and Ned Beatty .
The film depicts Superman 's origin , including his infancy as Kal-El of Krypton and his youthful years in the rural town of Smallville .
Disguised as reporter Clark Kent , he adopts a mild-mannered disposition in Metropolis and develops a romance with Lois Lane , while battling the villainous Lex Luthor .
Several directors , most notably Guy Hamilton , and screenwriters -LRB- Mario Puzo , David and Leslie Newman , and Robert Benton -RRB- , were associated with the project before Richard Donner was hired to direct .
Tom Mankiewicz was drafted in to rewrite the script and was given a `` creative consultant '' credit .
It was decided to film both Superman and its sequel Superman II -LRB- 1980 -RRB- simultaneously , with principal photography beginning in March 1977 and ending in October 1978 .
Tensions arose between Donner and the producers , and a decision was made to stop filming the sequel , of which 75 percent had already been completed , and finish the first film .
The most expensive film made up to that point with a budget of $ 55 million , Superman was released in December 1978 to critical acclaim and financial success , earning $ 300 million during its original theatrical run .
Reviewers particularly praised Reeve 's performance .
It was nominated for three Academy Awards , including Best Film Editing , Best Music -LRB- Original Score -RRB- , and Best Sound Mixing , and received a Special Achievement Academy Award for Visual Effects .
Groundbreaking in its use of special effects and science fiction/fantasy storytelling , the film 's legacy presaged the mainstream popularity of Hollywood 's superhero film franchises .