Super Bowl XLV was an American football game between the American Football Conference -LRB- AFC -RRB- champion Pittsburgh Steelers and the National Football Conference -LRB- NFC -RRB- champion Green Bay Packers to decide the National Football League -LRB- NFL -RRB- champion for the 2010 season .
The Packers defeated the Steelers by the score of 31 -- 25 .
The game was played on February 6 , 2011 , at Cowboys Stadium in Arlington , Texas , the first time the Super Bowl was played in the Dallas -- Fort Worth area .
Unlike other matchups , this game featured two title-abundant franchises : coming into the game , the Packers held the most NFL championships with 12 -LRB- 9 league championships prior to the Super Bowl era and 3 Super Bowl championships -RRB- , while the Steelers held the most Super Bowl championships with 6 .
The Packers entered their fifth Super Bowl in team history , and became the first number 6-seeded team in the NFC to compete in the Super Bowl , after posting a 10 -- 6 regular season record .
The Steelers finished the regular season with a 12 -- 4 record , and advanced to a league-tying 8th Super Bowl appearance .
Green Bay dominated most of the first half of Super Bowl XLV , jumping to a 21 -- 3 lead before Pittsburgh cut it down to 21 -- 10 just before halftime .
Then after the teams exchanged touchdowns , the Steelers pulled within 28 -- 25 midway through the fourth quarter with wide receiver Mike Wallace 's 25-yard touchdown reception from quarterback Ben Roethlisberger and a two-point conversion .
But the Packers answered with Mason Crosby 's 23-yard field goal with 2:07 remaining , and then prevented the Steelers from scoring on their final drive of the game .
Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers was named Super Bowl MVP , completing 24 of 39 passes for 304 yards and three touchdowns .
The broadcast of Super Bowl XLV on Fox averaged about 111 million viewers , breaking the record for the most-watched program in American television history .
The game 's attendance was 103,219 , just short of the Super Bowl record 103,985 set in Super Bowl XIV at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena , California .
The halftime show featured the American hip hop group The Black Eyed Peas , with additional performances by Usher and Slash .