`` Take a Bow '' is a song by American singer Madonna from her sixth studio album Bedtime Stories -LRB- 1994 -RRB- .
It was released as the album 's second single on November 29 , 1994 , by Maverick Records .
It is a midtempo pop ballad written and produced by Madonna and Babyface .
The song also appears on her compilation albums Something to Remember -LRB- 1995 -RRB- , GHV2 -LRB- 2001 -RRB- and Celebration -LRB- 2009 -RRB- .
Following the sexually explicit persona portrayed by Madonna on her previous album , Erotica , the singer wanted to tone down her image for Bedtime Stories .
She started collaborating with Babyface , whose work with other musicians had impressed her .
`` Take a Bow '' was developed from this collaboration , after Madonna listened to the beat and the chords of the demo structure of the song .
Recorded at The Hit Factory Studios in New York , `` Take a Bow '' was backed by a full orchestra .
It was also the first time that Babyface had worked with live strings , per Madonna 's suggestion .
Containing oriental pentatonic strings , giving the impression of Chinese or Japanese opera , `` Take a Bow '' lyrically talks about unrequited love , and Madonna saying goodbye .
It received favorable reviews from music critics , who praised the song 's soulful , poetic lyrics .
It was a commercial success in the United States , becoming Madonna 's eleventh number-one single on the Billboard Hot 100 , topping the chart for seven weeks .
It also reached number one in Canada , and the top ten in Italy , Switzerland and New Zealand .
The single had moderate success in the United Kingdom , reaching number 16 on the UK Singles Chart , ending Madonna 's record-holding string of 35 consecutive top-ten hits there .
The music video for `` Take a Bow '' was directed by Michael Haussman , and was filmed in Ronda , Spain .
The video depicts Madonna as a bullfighter 's -LRB- played by real-life Spanish bullfighter Emilio Muñoz -RRB- neglected lover , yearning for his love .
It won the Best Female Video award at the 1995 MTV Video Music Awards .
Journalistic and academic analysis of the video included its plotline , usage of religious iconography , themes and motifs of feminism and submission , as well as its impact on contemporary music videos .
In order to promote Bedtime Stories , Madonna performed `` Take a Bow '' on a few occasions , including live with Babyface at the 1995 American Music Awards .
In 2016 , she added the song to the setlist of the Asian and Oceanian legs of her Rebel Heart Tour and her one-off Sydney concert Madonna : Tears of a Clown .