Tamerlan Anzorovich Tsarnaev -LRB- Cyrillic : Тамерла́н Анзо́рович Царна́ев -LSB- , tæm@r'lɑːn_,tsɑr'naɪ.ɛf -RSB- October 21 , 1986 -- April 19 , 2013 -RRB- Тамерла́н Анзо́рович Царна́ев / Tamerlan Anzorovich Tsarnayev -LSB- tɐmʲɪrˈlan ɐnzoˈrɐvʲɪtɕ tsarˈnajɪf -RSB- Царнаев Анзор-кIант Тамерлан / Carnayev Anzor-khant Tamerlan .
was a terrorist who , with his brother Dzhokhar Tsarnaev , planted bombs at the Boston Marathon on April 15 , 2013 .
The bombings killed three people and reportedly injured as many as 264 others .
Tsarnaev was of half-Chechen and half-Avar descent .
He came to the United States in 2004 .
At the time of the bombings , Tsarnaev was an aspiring boxer who authorities believe had recently become a follower of radical Islam .
Shortly after the Federal Bureau of Investigation declared them suspects in the bombings and released images of them , the Tsarnaev brothers killed an MIT policeman , carjacked an SUV , and engaged in a shootout with the police in the Boston suburb of Watertown .
According to the federal indictment , during the shootout Tsarnaev was captured but died , partly as a result of his brother driving over him , and an MBTA police officer was critically injured in the course of Dzhokhar 's escape in the SUV -LRB- the latter by what may have been friendly fire -RRB- .
An injured Dzhokhar escaped , but was found , arrested , and hospitalized on the evening of April 19 after an unprecedented manhunt in which thousands of police searched a 20-block area of Watertown .
During his incarceration , Tsarnaev 's brother allegedly said during questioning that the pair next intended to detonate explosives in Times Square in New York City .
Dzhokhar reportedly also said to authorities that he and his brother were radicalized , at least in part , by watching Anwar al-Awlaki lectures .
ABC reported on April 23 , 2013 , that authorities linked Tsarnaev to an unsolved triple homicide in nearby Waltham that took place around the 10th anniversary of the September 11 attacks .