Tata Motors Limited -LRB- formerly TELCO , short for Tata Engineering and Locomotive Company -RRB- is an Indian multinational automotive manufacturing company headquartered in Mumbai , India , and a member of the Tata Group .
Its products include passenger cars , trucks , vans , coaches , buses , sports cars , construction equipment and military vehicles .
Tata Motors has auto manufacturing and assembly plants in Jamshedpur , Pantnagar , Lucknow , Sanand , Dharwad , and Pune in India , as well as in Argentina , South Africa , Great Britain and Thailand .
It has research and development centres in Pune , Jamshedpur , Lucknow , and Dharwad , India and in South Korea , Great Britain and Spain .
Tata Motors ' principal subsidiaries purchased the English premium car maker Jaguar Land Rover -LRB- the maker of Jaguar and Land Rover cars -RRB- and the South Korean commercial vehicle manufacturer Tata Daewoo .
Tata Motors has a bus-manufacturing joint venture with Marcopolo S.A. -LRB- Tata Marcopolo -RRB- , a construction-equipment manufacturing joint venture with Hitachi -LRB- Tata Hitachi Construction Machinery -RRB- , and a joint venture with Fiat Chrysler which manufactures automotive components and Fiat Chrysler and Tata branded vehicles.Founded in 1945 as a manufacturer of locomotives , the company manufactured its first commercial vehicle in 1954 in a collaboration with Daimler-Benz AG , which ended in 1969 .
Tata Motors entered the passenger vehicle market in 1991 with the launch of the Tata Sierra , becoming the first Indian manufacturer to achieve the capability of developing a competitive indigenous automobile .
In 1998 , Tata launched the first fully indigenous Indian passenger car , the Indica , and in 2008 launched the Tata Nano , the world 's cheapest car .
Tata Motors acquired the South Korean truck manufacturer Daewoo Commercial Vehicles Company in 2004 and purchased Jaguar Land Rover from Ford in 2008 .
Tata Motors is listed on the -LRB- BSE -RRB- Bombay Stock Exchange , where it is a constituent of the BSE SENSEX index , the National Stock Exchange of India , and the New York Stock Exchange .
The company is ranked 226th on the Fortune Global 500 list of the world 's biggest corporations as of 2016 .
On 17 January 2017 , Natarajan Chandrasekaran was appointed chairman of the company .
.
The company plans to introduce a new compact SUV named NEXON in Q4 of 2017 .