Team Fortress 2 -LRB- TF2 -RRB- is a team-based multiplayer first-person shooter video game developed and published by Valve Corporation .
It is the sequel to Team Fortress , the 1996 mod for Quake and its 1999 remake , Team Fortress Classic .
It was released as part of the video game bundle The Orange Box in October 2007 for Microsoft Windows and the Xbox 360 .
A PlayStation 3 version followed in December 2007 .
The game was released for Windows as a standalone entry in April 2008 , and was updated to support OS X in June 2010 and Linux in February 2013 .
It is distributed online through Valve 's digital retailer Steam , with retail distribution being handled by Electronic Arts .
In Team Fortress 2 , players join one of two teams comprising nine character classes , battling in a variety of game modes including capture the flag and king of the hill .
The development is led by John Cook and Robin Walker , creators of the original Team Fortress .
Announced in 1998 , the game once had more realistic , militaristic visuals and gameplay , but this changed over the protracted nine-year development .
After Valve released no information for six years , Team Fortress 2 regularly featured in Wired News annual vaporware list among other ignominies .
The finished Team Fortress 2 has cartoon-like visuals influenced by the art of J. C. Leyendecker , Dean Cornwell , and Norman Rockwell , and uses Valve 's Source game engine .
Team Fortress 2 received critical acclaim for its art direction , gameplay , humor , and use of character in a multiplayer-only game .
Valve continues to release new content , including maps , items and game modes , as well as community-made updates and contributed content .
In June 2011 , it became free-to-play , supported by microtransactions for in-game cosmetics .
A ` drop system ' was also added and refined , allowing free-to-play users to periodically receive game equipment and items by use of a random number generator .
Though the game had a unofficial competitive scene for many years , support for official competitive play through ranked matchmaking and an overhauled casual experience was added in July 2016 .