Rafael Edward `` Ted '' Cruz -LSB- ˈkruːz -RSB- -LRB- born December 22 , 1970 -RRB- is an American politician and attorney , who has served as the junior United States Senator from Texas since 2013 .
He was a candidate for the Republican nomination for President of the United States in the 2016 election .
Cruz graduated from Princeton University , New Jersey , in 1992 , and from Harvard Law School , Massachusetts , in 1995 .
From 1999 to 2003 , he served in various political appointee positions : the Director of the Office of Policy Planning at the Federal Trade Commission -LRB- FTC -RRB- , an Associate Deputy Attorney General at the United States Department of Justice , and a Domestic Policy Advisor to George W. Bush on the 2000 George W. Bush Presidential campaign .
Cruz served as Solicitor General of Texas , from 2003 to 2008 , appointed by Texas Attorney General , Greg Abbott .
He was the first Hispanic , and the longest-serving , Solicitor General in Texas history .
From 2004 to 2009 , Cruz was an Adjunct Professor at the University of Texas School of Law in Austin , Texas , where he taught U.S. Supreme Court litigation .
Cruz ran for the Senate seat vacated by fellow Republican Kay Bailey Hutchison and , in July 2012 , defeated Lieutenant Governor David Dewhurst during the Republican primary runoff , 57 -- 43 % .
He defeated former State Representative Paul Sadler in the November 2012 general election , winning 56 -- 41 % .
He is the first Hispanic American to serve as a U.S. Senator representing Texas , and is one of three senators of Cuban descent .
He chairs the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Oversight , Federal Rights and Agency Activities , and is the Chairman of the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Space , Science and Competitiveness .
In November 2012 , he was appointed Vice-Chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee .
Cruz began campaigning for the Republican presidential nomination in March 2015 .
During the primary campaign , his base of support was strongest with `` women , white evangelical Protestants , people over the age of 50 , and those who identified themselves as conservatives '' , though he had crossover appeal to other factions within his party , including libertarian conservatives and millennials .
Cruz 's victory in the February 2016 Iowa caucuses marked the first time a Hispanic person won a U.S. presidential caucus or primary .
He eventually emerged as the main challenger to frontrunner Donald Trump .
He suspended his campaign for president on May 3 , 2016 , after losing the Republican primary in Indiana to Trump .