`` Telephone '' is a song recorded by American singer Lady Gaga for her third EP , The Fame Monster -LRB- 2009 -RRB- .
The song features American singer Beyoncé .
The song was written by Gaga , Rodney Jerkins , LaShawn Daniels , Lazonate Franklin and Beyoncé .
Inspired by her fear of suffocation , Gaga explained that the lyrics preferring relaxing on the dance floor to answering her lover 's phone call are a metaphor , the phone calling her representing the fear of not having worked hard enough to succeed .
Originally , Gaga wrote the song for Britney Spears , who recorded a demo .
Musically , `` Telephone '' consists of an expanded bridge , verse-rap and a sampled voice of an operator announcing that the phone line is unreachable .
Beyoncé appears in the middle of the song , singing the verses in a rapid-fire way , accompanied by double beats .
The song received positive reviews from critics who frequently noted `` Telephone '' as a stand-out track from The Fame Monster .
It was Grammy-nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals in 2011 .
`` Telephone '' charted in a number of countries due to digital sales following the album 's release , namely in the United States , Australia , Canada , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Sweden and Hungary .
The song was particularly successful in Europe where it reached the top of the charts in Belgium , Denmark , Hungary , Ireland , Norway and the United Kingdom .
According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry , the single sold 7.4 million digital copies worldwide in 2010 , making it one of Gaga 's best-selling singles .
The accompanying music video is a continuation of the video for her 2009 song , `` Paparazzi '' , and is also shot as a short film .
After Gaga gets bailed out of prison by Beyoncé , they go to a diner and poison the guests having breakfast .
After the homicide they escape and end up in a high-speed police chase .
The video referenced Quentin Tarantino and his films Pulp Fiction -LRB- 1994 -RRB- and Kill Bill : Volume 1 -LRB- 2003 -RRB- .
The video received generally positive reviews was nominated for three awards at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , including one for Video of the Year .
In January 2015 Billboard named it the best video of the first half of the decade .
In memory of Alexander McQueen , Gaga performed an acoustic rendition of `` Telephone '' mixed with `` Dance in the Dark '' at the 2010 BRIT Awards .
It was also added to the set list of The Monster Ball Tour in 2010 , the Born This Way Ball in 2012 and ArtRave : The Artpop Ball in 2014 .