Tetris -LRB- , pronounced -LSB- ˈtɛtrʲɪs -RSB- -RRB- is a tile-matching puzzle video game , originally designed and programmed by Russian game designer Alexey Pajitnov .
It was released on June 6 , 1984 , while he was working for the Dorodnitsyn Computing Centre of the Academy of Science of the USSR in Moscow .
He derived its name from the Greek numerical prefix tetra - -LRB- all of the game 's pieces contain four segments -RRB- and tennis , Pajitnov 's favorite sport .
Tetris was the first entertainment software to be exported from the USSR to the US , where it was published by Spectrum HoloByte for Commodore 64 and IBM PC .
The Tetris game is a popular use of tetrominoes , the four-element special case of polyominoes .
Polyominoes have been used in popular puzzles since at least 1907 , and the name was given by the mathematician Solomon W. Golomb in 1953 .
However , even the enumeration of pentominoes is dated to antiquity .
The game -LRB- or one of its many variants -RRB- is available for nearly every video game console and computer operating system , as well as on devices such as graphing calculators , mobile phones , portable media players , PDAs , Network music players and even as an Easter egg on non-media products like oscilloscopes .
It has even inspired Tetris serving dishes and been played on the sides of various buildings .
While versions of Tetris were sold for a range of 1980s home computer platforms as well as arcades , it was the hugely successful handheld version for the Game Boy launched in 1989 that established the game as one of the most popular ever .
Electronic Gaming Monthly '' 's 100th issue had Tetris in first place as `` Greatest Game of All Time '' .
In 2007 , Tetris came in second place in IGN 's `` 100 Greatest Video Games of All Time '' .
In January 2010 , it was announced that the Tetris franchise had sold more than 170 million copies , approximately 70 million physical copies and over 100 million copies for cell phones , making it the best selling paid-downloaded game of all time .
On 14 March 2014 , The Tetris Company announced a deal to bring Tetris '' to two of the latest hardware platforms , the Xbox One and PlayStation 4 , in partnership with Ubisoft -LRB- publishing -RRB- and SoMa Play -LRB- development -RRB- , to coincide with the franchise 's 30th anniversary .