The Great Gatsby is a 1925 novel written by American author F. Scott Fitzgerald that follows a cast of characters living in the fictional town of West Egg on prosperous Long Island in the summer of 1922 .
The story primarily concerns the young and mysterious millionaire Jay Gatsby and his quixotic passion and obsession for the beautiful former debutante Daisy Buchanan .
Considered to be Fitzgerald 's magnum opus , The Great Gatsby explores themes of decadence , idealism , resistance to change , social upheaval , and excess , creating a portrait of the Jazz Age or the Roaring Twenties that has been described as a cautionary tale regarding the American Dream .
Fitzgerald -- inspired by the parties he had attended while visiting Long Island 's north shore -- began planning the novel in 1923 , desiring to produce , in his words , `` something new -- something extraordinary and beautiful and simple and intricately patterned . ''
Progress was slow , with Fitzgerald completing his first draft following a move to the French Riviera in 1924 .
His editor , Maxwell Perkins , felt the book was vague and persuaded the author to revise over the next winter .
Fitzgerald was repeatedly ambivalent about the book 's title and he considered a variety of alternatives , including titles that referenced the Roman character Trimalchio ; the title he was last documented to have desired was Under the Red , White , and Blue .
First published by Scribner 's in April 1925 , The Great Gatsby received mixed reviews and sold poorly ; in its first year , the book sold only 20,000 copies .
Fitzgerald died in 1940 , believing himself to be a failure and his work forgotten .
However , the novel experienced a revival during World , and became a part of American high school curricula and numerous stage and film adaptations in the following decades .
Today , The Great Gatsby is widely considered to be a literary classic and a contender for the title `` Great American Novel . ''
In 1998 , the Modern Library editorial board voted it the 20th century 's best American novel and second best English-language novel of the same time period .