The Sopranos is an American crime drama television series created by David Chase .
The story revolves around the fictional character , New Jersey-based Italian American mobster Tony Soprano -LRB- James Gandolfini -RRB- .
The series portrays the difficulties he faces as he tries to balance the conflicting requirements of his home life and his criminal organization .
These are often highlighted during his therapy sessions with psychiatrist Jennifer Melfi -LRB- Lorraine Bracco -RRB- .
The series features Tony 's family members , mafia colleagues and rivals , in prominent roles and story arcs , most notably his wife Carmela -LRB- Edie Falco -RRB- and protégé Christopher Moltisanti -LRB- Michael Imperioli -RRB- .
After the pilot was ordered in 1997 , the show premiered on the premium cable network HBO in the United States on January 10 , 1999 , and ran its six seasons with 86 episodes to June 10 , 2007 .
The series then went through syndication and has been broadcast on A&E in the United States and internationally .
The Sopranos was produced by HBO , Chase Films , and Brad Grey Television .
It was primarily filmed at Silvercup Studios , New York City , and on location in New Jersey .
The executive producers throughout the show 's run were David Chase , Brad Grey , Robin Green , Mitchell Burgess , Ilene S. Landress , Terence Winter , and Matthew Weiner .
The Sopranos is widely regarded as one of the greatest television series of all time .
The series also won a multitude of awards , including Peabody Awards for its first two seasons , 21 Primetime Emmy Awards and five Golden Globe Awards .
A staple of 2000s American popular culture , the series has been the subject of critical analysis , controversy , and parody .
It has spawned books , a video game , high-charting soundtrack albums , and a large amount of assorted merchandise .
Several members of the show 's cast and crew who were previously largely unknown to the public have had successful careers after The Sopranos .
In 2013 , the Writers Guild of America named The Sopranos the best-written TV series of all time , while TV Guide ranked it the best television series of all time .