The Fame is the debut studio album by American singer Lady Gaga .
It was released on August 19 , 2008 through Interscope Records .
After joining Kon Live Distribution and Cherrytree Records in 2008 , Gaga began working on the album with different producers , primarily RedOne , Martin Kierszenbaum and Rob Fusari .
Musically , The Fame is a synthpop and dance-pop album that has influences of pop music from the 1980s .
Lyrically , the album visualizes Gaga 's love of fame in general while also dealing with subjects such as love , sex , money , drugs and sexual identity .
Promotion was primarily through The Fame Ball Tour and multiple television appearances .
The Fame was included as a bonus disc on the deluxe edition of the extended play , The Fame Monster -LRB- November 18 , 2009 -RRB- .
The album received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who commended the album 's lyrical content and Gaga 's musicianship and vocal ability .
The album was a commercial success , topping the charts in different countries worldwide , including the United Kingdom , Canada , Germany , Ireland , Poland and Switzerland .
In the United States , it peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 , while topping the Dance/Electronic Albums chart for 106 non-consecutive weeks .
The Fame became the fifth best-selling album of 2009 .
It has sold 4.7 million copies in the United States as of April 2016 and is the seventh best-selling digital album in history .
The album sold 15 million copies worldwide as of November 2010 .
The first two singles from The Fame -- `` Just Dance '' and `` Poker Face '' -- gained international success , topping the charts in several countries worldwide , including the United States , United Kingdom and Australia .
Subsequent single `` LoveGame '' and `` Paparazzi '' , were commercial successes as well , charting within the top ten of more than ten countries worldwide .
`` Eh , Eh -LRB- Nothing Else I Can Say -RRB- '' had a limited release , while `` Beautiful , Dirty , Rich '' was a promotional single .
The Fame has won multiple awards since its release .
It was nominated for a total of five Grammy Awards at the 52nd Grammy Awards , including the Grammy Award for Album of the Year .
It won the Grammy Award for Best Electronic/Dance Album and the Best Dance Recording for the single `` Poker Face '' .
It also won Best International Album at the 2010 BRIT Awards .
In 2013 , Rolling Stone named The Fame as one of the `` 100 Greatest Debut Albums of All-Time '' .