Marvel 's The Avengers -LRB- classified under the name Marvel Avengers Assemble in the United Kingdom and Ireland -RRB- , or simply The Avengers , is a 2012 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team of the same name , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
It is the sixth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe .
The film was written and directed by Joss Whedon and features an ensemble cast that includes Robert Downey Jr. , Chris Evans , Mark Ruffalo , Chris Hemsworth , Scarlett Johansson , Jeremy Renner , Tom Hiddleston , Clark Gregg , Cobie Smulders , Stellan Skarsgård , and Samuel L. Jackson .
In the film , Nick Fury , director of the peacekeeping organization S.H.I.E.L.D. , recruits Iron Man , Captain America , the Hulk , and Thor to form a team that must stop Thor 's brother Loki from subjugating Earth .
The film 's development began when Marvel Studios received a loan from Merrill Lynch in April 2005 .
After the success of the film Iron Man in May 2008 , Marvel announced that The Avengers would be released in July 2011 .
With the signing of Johansson in March 2009 , the film was pushed back for a 2012 release .
Whedon was brought on board in April 2010 and rewrote the original screenplay by Zak Penn. .
Production began in April 2011 in Albuquerque , New Mexico , before moving to Cleveland , Ohio , in August and New York City in September .
The film was converted to 3D in post-production .
The Avengers premiered on April 11 , 2012 , at Hollywood 's El Capitan Theatre and was released theatrically in the United States on May 4 , 2012 .
The film received positive reviews from critics , as well as numerous awards and nominations including Academy Award and BAFTA nominations for achievements in visual effects .
It has set or tied numerous box office records , including the biggest opening weekend in North America .
The Avengers grossed over $ 1.5 billion worldwide , and became the third-highest-grossing film during its theatrical run -- as well as the first Marvel production to generate $ 1 billion in ticket sales .
The film was released on Blu-ray Disc and DVD on September 25 , 2012 .
A sequel , titled Avengers : Age of Ultron , was released on May 1 , 2015 , while two additional sequels , Avengers : Infinity War and an untitled sequel , are currently in development , with Infinity War scheduled for a May 4 , 2018 release date , and its sequel scheduled to be released on May 3 , 2019 .