The Fate of the Furious -LRB- alternatively known as Fast & Furious 8 and Fast 8 , and often stylized as F8 -RRB- is a 2017 American action film directed by F. Gary Gray and written by Chris Morgan .
It is the eighth installment in The Fast and the Furious franchise .
The film stars Vin Diesel , Dwayne Johnson , Jason Statham , Michelle Rodriguez , Tyrese Gibson , Chris ` Ludacris ' Bridges , Scott Eastwood , Nathalie Emmanuel , Elsa Pataky , Kurt Russell and Charlize Theron .
The Fate of the Furious follows Dominic Toretto -LRB- Diesel -RRB- , who has settled down with his wife Letty -LRB- Rodriguez -RRB- , until cyberterrorist Cipher -LRB- Theron -RRB- coerces him into working for her and turns him against his team , forcing them to find Dom and take down Cipher .
The Fate of the Furious marks the first installment in the franchise since The Fast and the Furious : Tokyo Drift -LRB- 2006 -RRB- not to star both Paul Walker , who died in a single-vehicle crash on November 30 , 2013 while filming Furious 7 -LRB- 2015 -RRB- , and Jordana Brewster ; following script rewrites to the seventh installment after Walker 's death which completed the story arcs for both of their characters -LRB- Brian O'Conner and Mia Toretto , respectively -RRB- , both characters were retired .
Plans for an eighth installment were first announced in March 2015 when Diesel appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live !
and announced that the film would be set in New York City .
Preparations for the film began immediately after the release of Furious 7 , with Diesel , Morgan and producer Neal H. Moritz re-signing .
After setting an initial release date in the same month , casting took place between April and June 2015 .
In October 2015 , Gray was announced to direct the film in the place of James Wan , who had directed the previous installment .
Principal photography began in March 2016 in locations such as Mývatn , Havana , Atlanta , Cleveland and New York City , continuing the franchise 's tradition of filming in exotic locations around the world .
The Fate of the Furious premiered on April 4 , 2017 in Berlin , and was theatrically released in the United States on April 14 , 2017 , playing in 3D , IMAX 3D and 4DX internationally .
The film received mixed reviews from critics , who praised the action sequences and performances , while criticizing the storyline .
The film has grossed over $ 1.2 billion worldwide , making it the thirtieth film -LRB- and the second in the franchise , after Furious 7 -RRB- to gross over $ 1 billion , the second highest-grossing film of 2017 and the eleventh highest-grossing film of all time .
The film grossed $ 532 million worldwide during its opening weekend , setting the record for the highest-grossing opening of all time , ahead of Star Wars : The Force Awakens -LRB- $ 529 million -RRB- .
A sequel is scheduled to be released on April 19 , 2019 .