The Simpsons is an American animated sitcom created by Matt Groening for the Fox Broadcasting Company .
The series is a satirical depiction of working-class life epitomized by the Simpson family , which consists of Homer , Marge , Bart , Lisa , and Maggie .
The show is set in the fictional town of Springfield and parodies American culture , society , television , and the human condition .
The family was conceived by Groening shortly before a solicitation for a series of animated shorts with producer James L. Brooks .
Groening created a dysfunctional family and named the characters after members of his own family , substituting Bart for his own name .
The shorts became a part of The Tracey Ullman Show on April 19 , 1987 .
After a three-season run , the sketch was developed into a half-hour prime time show and became an early hit for Fox , becoming the network 's first series to land in the Top 30 ratings in a season -LRB- 1989 -- 90 -RRB- .
Since its debut on December 17 , 1989 , episodes of The Simpsons have been broadcast .
Its 28th season began on September 25 , 2016 .
It is the longest-running American sitcom and the longest-running American animated program , and , in 2009 , it surpassed Gunsmoke as the longest-running American scripted primetime television series .
The Simpsons Movie , a feature-length film , was released in theaters worldwide on July 27 , 2007 , and grossed over $ 527 million .
On November 4 , 2016 , the series was renewed for a twenty-ninth and thirtieth season of 22 episodes each , extending the show to 2019 .
The Simpsons received widespread critical acclaim throughout its first nine seasons , which are generally considered its `` Golden Age '' .
Time named it the 20th century 's best television series , and Erik Adams of The A.V. Club named it `` television 's crowning achievement regardless of format '' .
On January 14 , 2000 , the Simpson family was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame .
It has won dozens of awards since it debuted as a series , including 31 Primetime Emmy Awards , 30 Annie Awards , and a Peabody Award .
Homer 's exclamatory catchphrase `` D'oh ! ''
has been adopted into the English language , while The Simpsons has influenced many adult-oriented animated sitcoms .
Despite this , the show has also been criticized for what many perceive as a decline in quality over the years .