The Who are an English rock band that formed in 1964 .
Their classic line-up consisted of lead singer Roger Daltrey , guitarist and singer Pete Townshend , bass guitarist John Entwistle , and drummer Keith Moon .
They are considered one of the most influential rock bands of the 20th century , selling over 100 million records worldwide and holding a reputation for their live shows and studio work .
The Who developed from an earlier group , the Detours , and established themselves as part of the pop art and mod movements , featuring auto-destructive art by destroying guitars and drums on stage .
Their first single as the Who , `` I Ca n't Explain '' , reached the UK top ten , followed by a string of singles including `` My Generation '' , `` Substitute '' and `` Happy Jack '' .
In 1967 , they performed at the Monterey Pop Festival and released the US top ten single `` I Can See for Miles '' , while touring extensively .
The group 's fourth album , 1969 's rock opera Tommy , included the single `` Pinball Wizard '' and was a critical and commercial success .
Live appearances at Woodstock and the Isle of Wight Festival , along with the live album Live at Leeds , cemented their reputation as a respected rock act .
With their success came increased pressure on lead songwriter and visionary Townshend , and the follow-up to Tommy , Lifehouse , was abandoned .
Songs from the project made up 1971 's Who 's Next , which included the hit `` Wo n't Get Fooled Again '' .
The group released the album Quadrophenia in 1973 as a celebration of their mod roots , and oversaw the film adaptation of Tommy in 1975 .
They continued to tour to large audiences before semi-retiring from live performances at the end of 1976 .
The release of Who Are You in 1978 was overshadowed by the death of Moon shortly after .
Kenney Jones replaced Moon and the group resumed activity , releasing a film adaptation of Quadrophenia and the retrospective documentary The Kids Are Alright .
After Townshend became weary of touring , the group split in 1982 .
The Who occasionally re-formed for live appearances such as Live Aid in 1985 , a 25th anniversary tour in 1989 and a tour of Quadrophenia in 1996 -- 1997 .
They resumed regular touring in 1999 , with drummer Zak Starkey .
After Entwistle 's death in 2002 , plans for a new album were delayed .
Townshend and Daltrey continued as the Who , releasing Endless Wire in 2006 , and continued to play live regularly .
The Who 's major contributions to rock music include the development of the Marshall stack , large PA systems , use of the synthesizer , Entwistle and Moon 's lead playing styles , Townshend 's feedback and power chord guitar technique , and the development of the rock opera .
They are cited as an influence by hard rock , punk rock and mod bands , and their songs still receive regular exposure .