The Bends -LRB- stylised as the bends -RRB- is the second studio album by the English alternative rock band Radiohead , released on 13 March 1995 by Parlophone Records in the United Kingdom and by Capitol Records in the United States .
The album was produced by John Leckie and engineered by Nigel Godrich , who would go on to co-produce all future albums by the band .
The Bends marked the beginning of a shift in aesthetics and themes for the band , with greater use of keyboards and more abrasive guitar tracks , while balancing them with subtler ones .
The introspective grunge-influenced style of their debut album Pablo Honey -LRB- 1993 -RRB- evolved into more multi-layered rock with cryptic lyrics and larger ideas , as the band and its lead singer and songwriter Thom Yorke reacted against the rigours of their near-constant world tours .
The Bends received greater critical acclaim than Pablo Honey , receiving an enthusiastic critical reaction , and it reached # 4 on the UK Albums Chart .
However , it failed to build on the commercial success of `` Creep '' outside of the United Kingdom , and it peaked on the United States charts at # 88 .
Although it lacked the instant success of Radiohead 's subsequent albums , The Bends achieved triple platinum sales certifications in the UK and Canada , as well as platinum sales certifications in the United States -LRB- by the Recording Industry Association of America -RRB- and Europe .
The album spawned five charting singles ; My Iron Lung was first released as an EP in 1994 before the album was released , and `` High and Dry '' was later released with the album 's opener `` Planet Telex '' as its B-side .
`` Fake Plastic Trees '' was released as the album 's second single and was followed by `` Just '' .
`` Street Spirit -LRB- Fade Out -RRB- '' , the final single from the album , became their first top 5 hit in the United Kingdom .
In the years since its release , the album has frequently appeared in listener polls and critics ' lists of the greatest albums of all time .