The Hobbit , or There and Back Again is a children 's fantasy novel by English author J. R. R. Tolkien .
It was published on 21 September 1937 to wide critical acclaim , being nominated for the Carnegie Medal and awarded a prize from the New York Herald Tribune for best juvenile fiction .
The book remains popular and is recognized as a classic in children 's literature .
The Hobbit is set in a time `` between the Dawn of Færie and the Dominion of Men '' , and follows the quest of home-loving hobbit Bilbo Baggins to win a share of the treasure guarded by Smaug the dragon .
Bilbo 's journey takes him from light-hearted , rural surroundings into more sinister territory .
The story is told in the form of an episodic quest , and most chapters introduce a specific creature or type of creature of Tolkien 's geography .
Bilbo gains a new level of maturity , competence , and wisdom by accepting the disreputable , romantic , fey , and adventurous sides of his nature and applying his wits and common sense .
The story reaches its climax in the Battle of the Five Armies , where many of the characters and creatures from earlier chapters re-emerge to engage in conflict .
Personal growth and forms of heroism are central themes of the story , along with motifs of warfare .
These themes have led critics to view Tolkien 's own experiences during World War I as instrumental in shaping the story .
The author 's scholarly knowledge of Germanic philology and interest in fairy tales are often noted as influences .
The publisher was encouraged by the book 's critical and financial success and , therefore , requested a sequel .
As Tolkien 's work progressed on the successor The Lord of the Rings , he made retrospective accommodations for it in The Hobbit .
These few but significant changes were integrated into the second edition .
Further editions followed with minor emendations , including those reflecting Tolkien 's changing concept of the world into which Bilbo stumbled .
The work has never been out of print .
Its ongoing legacy encompasses many adaptations for stage , screen , radio , board games , and video games .
Several of these adaptations have received critical recognition on their own merits .