The Book of Mormon is a musical comedy about two young Mormon missionaries who travel to Africa to preach the Mormon religion .
First staged in 2011 , the play satirizes various Mormon beliefs and practices .
The script , lyrics , and music were written by Robert Lopez , Trey Parker , and Matt Stone .
Best known for creating the animated comedy South Park , Parker and Stone co-created the music with Lopez , the co-composer/co-lyricist of Avenue Q , and , subsequently , Frozen .
The Book of Mormon follows two Mormon missionaries as they attempt to share their scriptures with the inhabitants of a remote Ugandan village .
The earnest young men are challenged by the lack of interest of the locals , who are preoccupied with more pressing troubles such as AIDS , famine , and oppression from the local warlord .
In 2003 , Trey Parker , Robert Lopez , and Matt Stone began developing the musical , meeting sporadically for several years after Parker and Stone saw Avenue Q. Parker and Stone grew up in Colorado , and references to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had been commonplace in their previous works .
For research , the trio took a trip to Salt Lake City to meet with current and former Mormon missionaries .
Beginning in 2008 , developmental workshops were staged .
The show 's producer , Scott Rudin , opted to open the show directly on Broadway .
The show opened on Broadway in March 2011 , after nearly seven years of development .
The LDS Church issued a polite , measured response to the musical , and purchased advertising space in its playbill in later runs .
The Book of Mormon garnered overwhelmingly positive critical responses , and set records in ticket sales for the Eugene O'Neill Theatre .
The show was awarded nine Tony Awards , one of which was for Best Musical , and a Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album .
The original Broadway cast recording became the highest-charting Broadway cast album in over four decades , reaching number three on the Billboard charts .
In 2013 , the musical premiered in the West End .
Since then , it has staged two US national tours .
An Australian production opened in Melbourne and a Swedish production opened in Stockholm in 2017 .