The Matrix is a 1999 science fiction film written and directed by The Wachowskis , starring Keanu Reeves , Laurence Fishburne , Carrie-Anne Moss , Hugo Weaving , and Joe Pantoliano .
It depicts a dystopian future in which reality as perceived by most humans is actually a simulated reality called `` the Matrix '' , created by sentient machines to subdue the human population , while their bodies ' heat and electrical activity are used as an energy source .
Computer programmer `` Neo '' learns this truth and is drawn into a rebellion against the machines , which involves other people who have been freed from the `` dream world . ''
The Matrix is known for popularizing a visual effect known as `` bullet time '' , in which the heightened perception of certain characters is represented by allowing the action within a shot to progress in slow-motion while the camera 's viewpoint appears to move through the scene at normal speed .
The film is an example of the cyberpunk science fiction genre .
It contains numerous references to philosophical and religious ideas , and prominently pays homage to works such as Plato 's Allegory of the Cave , Jean Baudrillard 's Simulacra and Simulation and Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland .
The Wachowskis ' approach to action scenes drew upon their admiration for Japanese animation and martial arts films , and the film 's use of fight choreographers and wire fu techniques from Hong Kong action cinema influenced subsequent Hollywood action film productions .
The Matrix was first released in the United States on , 1999 , and grossed over $ 460 million worldwide .
It was generally well-received by critics and won four Academy Awards , as well as other accolades , including BAFTA Awards and Saturn Awards .
Reviewers praised The Matrix for its innovative visual effects , cinematography and entertainment value .
The film 's premise was both criticized for being derivative of earlier science fiction works and praised for being intriguing .
The action also polarized critics , some describing it as impressive , but others dismissing it as a trite distraction from an interesting premise .
The film has since appeared in lists of the greatest science fiction films , and , in 2012 , was added to the National Film Registry for preservation .
The success of the film led to the release of two feature film sequels , both written and directed by the Wachowskis : The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions .
The Matrix franchise was further expanded through the production of comic books , video games and animated short films , in which the Wachowskis were heavily involved .