The Divergent Series : Insurgent -LRB- also known simply as Insurgent -RRB- is a 2015 American science fiction action film directed by Robert Schwentke , based on Insurgent , the second book in the Divergent trilogy by Veronica Roth .
It is the sequel to the 2014 film Divergent and the second installment in The Divergent Series , produced by Lucy Fisher , Pouya Shabazian and Douglas Wick , with a screenplay by Brian Duffield , Akiva Goldsman and Mark Bomback .
Schwentke took over from Neil Burger as director , with Burger serving as the executive producer of the film .
Along with the first film 's returning cast , led by Shailene Woodley and Theo James , the sequel features supporting actors Octavia Spencer , Naomi Watts , Suki Waterhouse , Rosa Salazar , Daniel Dae Kim , Jonny Weston , Emjay Anthony , and Keiynan Lonsdale .
The plot of Insurgent takes place five days after the previous installment and continues to follow Dauntless soldier Tris Prior ; Tris and Four , her Dauntless instructor , are on the run after evading a coup from Erudite faction leader Jeanine and the rest of her faction .
The faction system in post-apocalyptic Chicago is crumbling , and everyone is desperate for power -- and answers .
Filming began on May 27 , 2014 in Atlanta , Georgia , before concluding on September 6 , 2014 .
The Divergent Series : Insurgent was released on March 20 , 2015 in the United States in the IMAX 3D format as well as regular 3D and 2D .
Critical reaction to the film was mixed to negative : some have considered the film to be an improvement over its predecessor , with reviewers highlighting the visual style , action sequences , and Woodley 's performance , but the film still received a significant amount of negative criticism , mainly focused on its storyline .
The film was a commercial success , grossing $ 52.2 million in its opening weekend and reaching the number one spot at the box-office .
During its release in theaters , the film earned over US$ 297 million worldwide .
A sequel , Allegiant , was released on March 18 , 2016 .