The Hunger Games is a 2012 American dystopian science fiction adventure film directed by Gary Ross and based on the novel of the same name by Suzanne Collins .
It is the first installment in The Hunger Games film series and was produced by Nina Jacobson and Jon Kilik , with a screenplay by Ross , Collins , and Billy Ray .
The film stars Jennifer Lawrence , Josh Hutcherson , Liam Hemsworth , Woody Harrelson , Elizabeth Banks , Lenny Kravitz , Stanley Tucci , and Donald Sutherland .
The story takes place in a dystopian post-apocalyptic future in the nation of Panem , where boys and girls between the ages of 12 and 18 must take part in the Hunger Games , a televised annual event in which the `` tributes '' are required to fight to the death until there is only one survivor .
Katniss Everdeen -LRB- Lawrence -RRB- volunteers to take her younger sister 's place .
Joined by her district 's male tribute , Peeta Mellark -LRB- Hutcherson -RRB- , Katniss travels to the Capitol to train for the Hunger Games under the guidance of former victor Haymitch Abernathy -LRB- Harrelson -RRB- .
Development of The Hunger Games began in March 2009 when Lions Gate Entertainment entered into a co-production agreement with Color Force , which had acquired the rights a few weeks earlier .
Collins collaborated with Ray and Ross to write the screenplay .
The screenplay expanded the character of Seneca Crane to allow several developments to be shown directly to the audience and Ross added several scenes between Crane and Coriolanus Snow .
The main characters were cast between March and May 2011 .
Principal photography began in May 2011 and ended in September 2011 , with filming taking place in North Carolina .
The Hunger Games was shot entirely on film as opposed to digital .
The film was released on March 21 , 2012 , in some European countries and in the US on March 23 , 2012 , in both conventional theaters and digital IMAX theaters .
Japan received it last , on September 28 .
When the film released , it set records for opening day -LRB- $ 67.3 million -RRB- and opening weekend for a non-sequel .
At the time of its release , the film 's opening weekend gross -LRB- $ 152.5 million -RRB- was the third-largest of any movie in North America .
It is the first film since Avatar to remain in first place at the North American box office for four consecutive weekends .
The film was a massive box-office success by grossing over $ 694 million worldwide against its budget of $ 78 million , making it the third-highest-grossing film in the United States and ninth-highest-grossing worldwide of 2012 .
It was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on August 18 , 2012 .
With 7,434,058 units sold , the DVD was the best-selling DVD of 2012 .
A sequel , The Hunger Games : Catching Fire , was released on November 22 , 2013 , in the United States .
The Hunger Games received positive reviews from critics , with praise for its themes and messages , as well as Jennifer Lawrence 's portrayal of Katniss , though there was criticism of the film 's use of shaky cam in the action sequences .
Like the novel , the film has been noted for its similarities to other works , such as Robert Sheckley 's short story `` Seventh Victim '' and its Italian film adaptation The 10th Victim , the Japanese novel Battle Royale and its film adaptation , and the Shirley Jackson short story `` The Lottery '' , with some criticizing The Hunger Games for being derivative of such works .
Collins stated in an interview that her novel and screenplay drew on sources of inspiration such as the myth of Theseus , Roman gladiatorial games , reality television , and the desensitization of viewers to media coverage of real-life tragedy and war , not to think as just an audience member , `` Because those are real people on the screen , and they 're not going away when the commercials start to roll . ''
The song `` Safe & Sound '' won a Grammy Award and was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song .
For her performance , Lawrence won the Saturn Award for Best Actress , the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress in an Action Movie , the Empire Award for Best Actress and was also nominated for the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress .