The Bahamas -LRB- -LSB- bəˈhɑːməz -RSB- -RRB- , known officially as the Commonwealth of The Bahamas , is an archipelagic state within the Lucayan Archipelago .
It consists of more than 700 islands , cays , and islets in the Atlantic Ocean and is located north of Cuba and Hispaniola -LRB- Haiti and the Dominican Republic -RRB- ; northwest of the Turks and Caicos Islands ; southeast of the US state of Florida and east of the Florida Keys .
The capital is Nassau on the island of New Providence .
The designation of `` the Bahamas '' can refer either to the country or to the larger island chain that it shares with the Turks and Caicos Islands .
As stated in the mandate/manifesto of the Royal Bahamas Defence Force , the Bahamas territory encompasses 180000 sqmi of ocean space .
The Bahamas is the site of Columbus ' first landfall in the New World in 1492 .
At that time , the islands were inhabited by the Lucayan , a branch of the Arawakan-speaking Taino people .
Although the Spanish never colonised the Bahamas , they shipped the native Lucayans to slavery in Hispaniola .
The islands were mostly deserted from 1513 until 1648 , when English colonists from Bermuda settled on the island of Eleuthera .
The Bahamas became a British Crown colony in 1718 , when the British clamped down on piracy .
After the American War of Independence , the Crown resettled thousands of American Loyalists in the Bahamas ; they brought their slaves with them and established plantations on land grants .
Africans constituted the majority of the population from this period .
The Bahamas became a haven for freed African slaves : the Royal Navy resettled Africans here liberated from illegal slave ships ; American slaves and Seminoles escaped here from Florida ; and the government freed American slaves carried on United States domestic ships that had reached the Bahamas due to weather .
Slavery in the Bahamas was abolished in 1834 .
Today the descendants of slaves and free Africans make up nearly 90 % of the population ; issues related to the slavery years are part of society .
The Bahamas became an independent Commonwealth realm in 1973 , retaining Queen Elizabeth II as its monarch .
In terms of gross domestic product per capita , the Bahamas is one of the richest countries in the Americas -LRB- following the United States and Canada -RRB- , with an economy based on tourism and finance .