The New York Times -LRB- sometimes abbreviated NYT and The Times -RRB- is an American daily newspaper , founded and continuously published in New York City since September 18 , 1851 , by The New York Times Company .
The New York Times has won 122 Pulitzer Prizes , more than any other newspaper .
The paper 's print version in 2013 had the second-largest circulation , behind The Wall Street Journal , and the largest circulation among the metropolitan newspapers in the United States .
The New York Times is ranked 18th in the world by circulation .
Following industry trends , its weekday circulation had fallen in 2009 to fewer than one million .
Nicknamed `` The Gray Lady '' , The New York Times has long been regarded within the industry as a national `` newspaper of record '' .
It has been owned by the Ochs-Sulzberger family since 1896 ; Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr. , the publisher of the Times and the chairman of the New York Times Company , is the fourth generation of the family to helm the paper .
The New York Times international version , formerly the International Herald Tribune , is now called the New York Times International Edition .
The paper 's motto , `` All the News That 's Fit to Print '' , appears in the upper left-hand corner of the front page .
Since the mid-1970s , The New York Times has greatly expanded its layout and organization , adding special weekly sections on various topics supplementing the regular news , editorials , sports , and features .
Since 2008 , The New York Times has been organized into the following sections : News , Editorials/Opinions-Columns/Op-Ed , New York -LRB- metropolitan -RRB- , Business , Sports of The Times , Arts , Science , Styles , Home , Travel , and other features .
On Sunday , The New York Times is supplemented by the Sunday Review -LRB- formerly the Week in Review -RRB- , The New York Times Book Review , The New York Times Magazine and T : The New York Times Style Magazine -LRB- T is published 13 times a year -RRB- .
The New York Times stayed with the broadsheet full page set-up -LRB- as some others have changed into a tabloid lay-out -RRB- and an eight-column format for several years , after most papers switched to six , and was one of the last newspapers to adopt color photography , especially on the front page .