The Dark Knight Rises is a 2012 British-American superhero film directed by Christopher Nolan , who co-wrote the screenplay with his brother Jonathan Nolan , and the story with David S. Goyer .
Featuring the DC Comics character Batman , the film is the final installment in Nolan 's Batman film trilogy , and the sequel to Batman Begins -LRB- 2005 -RRB- and The Dark Knight -LRB- 2008 -RRB- .
Christian Bale reprises the lead role of Bruce Wayne/Batman , with a returning cast of allies : Michael Caine as Alfred Pennyworth , Gary Oldman as James Gordon , and Morgan Freeman as Lucius Fox .
The film introduces Selina Kyle -LRB- Anne Hathaway -RRB- , and Bane -LRB- Tom Hardy -RRB- .
Eight years after the events of The Dark Knight , merciless revolutionary Bane forces an older Bruce Wayne to resume his role as Batman and save Gotham City from nuclear destruction .
Christopher Nolan was hesitant about returning to the series for a second time , but agreed after developing a story with his brother and Goyer that he felt would conclude the series on a satisfactory note .
Nolan drew inspiration from Bane 's comic book debut in the 1993 `` Knightfall '' storyline , the 1986 series The Dark Knight Returns , and the 1999 storyline `` No Man 's Land '' .
Filming took place in locations including Jodhpur , London , Nottingham , Glasgow , Los Angeles , New York City , Newark , and Pittsburgh .
Nolan used IMAX 70 mm film cameras for much of the filming , including the first six minutes of the film , to optimize the quality of the picture .
A vehicle variation of the Batplane and Batcopter termed the `` Bat '' , an underground prison set , and a new Batcave set were created specifically for the film .
As with The Dark Knight , viral marketing campaigns began early during production .
When filming concluded , Warner Bros. refocused its campaign : developing promotional websites , releasing the first six minutes of the film , screening theatrical trailers , and sending out information regarding the film 's plot .
The Dark Knight Rises premiered in New York City on July 16 , 2012 .
The film was released in the United States and the United Kingdom on July 20 , 2012 .
It received positive reviews from critics , many of whom named it one of the best films of 2012 .
Like its predecessor , the film grossed over $ 1 billion worldwide at the box office , making it the second film in the Batman film series to earn $ 1 billion .
It is currently the 17th-highest-grossing film of all time , the third-highest-grossing film of 2012 , and the fourth-highest-grossing superhero film of all time .