The Dark Knight is a 2008 superhero film directed , co-produced , and co-written by Christopher Nolan .
Featuring the DC Comics character Batman , the film is the second part of Nolan 's The Dark Knight Trilogy and a sequel to 2005 's Batman Begins , starring an ensemble cast including Christian Bale , Michael Caine , Heath Ledger , Gary Oldman , Aaron Eckhart , Maggie Gyllenhaal and Morgan Freeman .
In the film , Bruce Wayne/Batman -LRB- Bale -RRB- , James Gordon -LRB- Oldman -RRB- and Harvey Dent -LRB- Eckhart -RRB- form an alliance to dismantle organized crime in Gotham City , but are menaced by a criminal mastermind known as the Joker -LRB- Ledger -RRB- who seeks to undermine Batman 's influence and create chaos .
Nolan 's inspiration for the film was the Joker 's comic book debut in 1940 , the 1988 graphic novel The Killing Joke , and the 1996 series The Long Halloween , which retold Two-Face 's origin .
The nickname `` the Dark Knight '' was first applied to Batman in Batman # 1 -LRB- 1940 -RRB- , in a story written by Bill Finger .
The Dark Knight was filmed primarily in Chicago , as well as in several other locations in the United States , the United Kingdom , and Hong Kong .
Nolan used IMAX 70 mm film cameras to film some sequences , including the Joker 's first appearance in the film .
The film is dedicated to the memory of Ledger , who died on January 22 , 2008 , some months after the completed filming and six months before the film 's release , from a toxic combination of prescription drugs , leading to intense attention from the press and movie-going public .
Warner Bros. initially created a viral marketing campaign for The Dark Knight , developing promotional websites and trailers highlighting screenshots of Ledger as the Joker .
A co-production of the United States and the United Kingdom , The Dark Knight was released on July 16 , 2008 in Australia , on July 18 , 2008 , in North America , and on July 25 , 2008 , in the United Kingdom .
Considered by film critics to be one of the best films of the 2000s and one of the best superhero films ever , the film received highly positive reviews and set numerous records during its theatrical run .
The Dark Knight appeared on more critics ' top ten lists -LRB- 287 -RRB- than any other film of 2008 with the exception of WALL-E , and more critics -LRB- 77 -RRB- named The Dark Knight the best film of 2008 than any other film released that year .
With over $ 1 billion in revenue worldwide , it is the 29th-highest-grossing film of all time , unadjusted for inflation .
The film received eight Academy Award nominations ; it won the award for Best Sound Editing and Ledger was posthumously awarded Best Supporting Actor .
The Dark Knight Rises , the final film in the trilogy , was released on July 20 , 2012 .