The Concert for Bangladesh -LRB- or Bangla Desh , as the country was originally spelled -RRB- was the collective name for two benefit concerts organised by former Beatles lead guitarist George Harrison and Indian sitar master Ravi Shankar .
The concerts were held at 2:30 and 8:00 pm on Sunday , 1 August 1971 , at Madison Square Garden in New York City .
The shows were organised to raise international awareness and fund relief efforts for refugees from East Pakistan -LRB- now Bangladesh -RRB- , following the Bangladesh Liberation War-related genocide .
The concerts were followed by a bestselling live album , a boxed three-record set , and Apple Films ' concert documentary , which opened in cinemas in the spring of 1972 .
The event was the first-ever benefit concert of such a magnitude and featured a supergroup of performers that included Harrison , fellow ex-Beatle Ringo Starr , Bob Dylan , Eric Clapton , Billy Preston , Leon Russell and the band Badfinger .
In addition , Shankar and Ali Akbar Khan -- both of whom had ancestral roots in Bangladesh -- performed an opening set of Indian classical music .
Decades later , Shankar would say of the overwhelming success of the event : `` In one day , the whole world knew the name of Bangladesh .
It was a fantastic occasion ... ''
The concerts were attended by a total of 40,000 people , and raised close to US$ 250,000 for Bangladesh relief , which was administered by UNICEF .
Although the project was subsequently marred by financial problems -- a result of the pioneering nature of the venture -- the Concert for Bangladesh is recognised as a highly successful and influential humanitarian aid project , generating both awareness and considerable funds as well as providing valuable lessons and inspiration for projects that followed , notably Live Aid .
By 1985 , through revenue raised from the Concert for Bangladesh live album and film , an estimated $ 12 million had been sent to Bangladesh in relief .
Sales of the live album and DVD release of the film continue to benefit the George Harrison Fund for UNICEF .