The Colbert Report -LRB- -LSB- koʊlˈbɛr_rəˈpɔr -RSB- -RRB- is an American late-night talk and news satire television program hosted by Stephen Colbert that aired four days a week on Comedy Central from October 17 , 2005 to December 18 , 2014 for 1,447 episodes .
The show focused on a fictional anchorman character named Stephen Colbert , played by his real-life namesake .
The character , described by Colbert as a `` well-intentioned , poorly informed , high-status idiot '' , is a caricature of televised political pundits .
Furthermore , the show satirized conservative personality-driven political talk programs , particularly Fox News 's The O'Reilly Factor .
The Colbert Report is a spin-off of Comedy Central 's The Daily Show , where he acted as a correspondent for the program for several years while developing the character .
The program was created by Colbert , Jon Stewart , and Ben Karlin .
The show 's writing was grounded in improvisation , and often lampooned current events stories .
The show 's structure also included a guest interview , in which the Colbert character attempts to deconstruct his opponent 's argument .
The show was taped in New York City 's Hell 's Kitchen neighborhood , and the program 's set is `` hyper-American '' , epitomizing the character 's ego .
The show was taped and broadcast Monday through Thursday , with weeks taken off at multiple points in a given year for breaks .
The Colbert Report saw immediate critical and ratings successes , leading to various awards , including two prestigious Peabody Awards .
The show 's cultural influence -- which occasionally would require a fair degree of participation from the show 's audience , dubbed the Colbert Nation -- extended beyond the program a number of times .
This impact included the character running for U.S. President twice , co-hosting a rally at the National Mall , presenting a controversial performance at the White House Correspondents ' Dinner , and establishing a real Super PAC that raised a million dollars .
In addition , the show inspired various forms of multimedia , including music and multiple best-selling books .