The Lego Movie is a 2014 3D computer-animated adventure comedy film directed by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller .
The screenplay , penned by Lord and Miller , is based on a story by them and Dan and Kevin Hageman ; while the film features a few live-action scenes , it is primarily an animated film .
Based on the Lego line of construction toys , the story focuses on an ordinary Lego minifigure who finds himself being the only one to help a resistance stop a tyrannical businessman from gluing everything in the Lego worlds into his vision of perfection .
Chris Pratt , Will Ferrell , Elizabeth Banks , Will Arnett , Nick Offerman , Alison Brie , Charlie Day , Liam Neeson , and Morgan Freeman provide their voices for the film 's main characters .
The Lego Movie was the first film produced by Warner Animation Group since the release of Looney Tunes : Back in Action in 2003 , and was an international co-production of the United States , Australia and Denmark .
It was dedicated to the memory of Kathleen Fleming , the former director of entertainment development of the Lego company , following her death in Cancun , Mexico in April 2013 .
The film was released on February 7 , 2014 by Warner Bros. .
Pictures to near-unanimous acclaim ; critics praised its visual style , humor , voice cast and heartwarming message .
It earned more than $ 257 million in the U.S. and Canada and $ 210 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of over $ 469 million , with the film winning the BAFTA Award for Best Animated Film , the Critics ' Choice Movie Award for Best Animated Feature , and the Saturn Award for Best Animated Film ; it was also nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film and an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song for `` Everything Is Awesome '' .
The film has since expanded into a major franchise which ties into the Lego brand .
A spin-off film , The Lego Batman Movie , was released to theaters on February 10 , 2017 , with a second spin-off , The Lego Ninjago Movie , set to release later in the year .
A sequel to the film is scheduled for release on February 8 , 2019 , as well as a third spin-off , The Billion Brick Race , also planned .