The Amazing Spider-Man 2 -LRB- also released as The Amazing Spider-Man 2 : Rise of Electro in some markets -RRB- is a 2014 American superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Spider-Man .
The film was directed by Marc Webb and was produced by Avi Arad and Matt Tolmach .
It is the fifth theatrical Spider-Man film produced by Columbia Pictures and Marvel Entertainment , and is the sequel to The Amazing Spider-Man -LRB- 2012 -RRB- ; it is also the final film in the Amazing Spider-Man franchise .
The studio hired James Vanderbilt to write the screenplay and Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci to rewrite it .
The film stars Andrew Garfield as Peter Parker / Spider-Man , Emma Stone as Gwen Stacy , Dane DeHaan as Green Goblin / Harry Osborn , Campbell Scott and Embeth Davidtz as Peter 's parents , and Sally Field as Aunt May , with the addition of a new cast including Paul Giamatti as Rhino / Aleksei Sytsevich and Jamie Foxx as Electro / Max Dillon .
Development of The Amazing Spider-Man 2 began after the success of The Amazing Spider-Man .
DeHaan , Giamatti , Jones , and Cooper were cast between December 2012 and February 2013 .
Filming took place in New York City from February to June 2013 .
The film was released in 2D , 3D , and IMAX 3D on May 2 , 2014 , in the United States with two international premieres being held between March 31 & April 10 , 2014 .
The film received mixed reviews , and although it grossed $ 709 million worldwide and became the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2014 , it was the lowest-grossing film in the series .
However , the film was declared a `` hit '' in the overseas markets with high openings and a wide cinematic release .
The film subsequently won awards for its music composition and acting , notably one Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Award and two ASCAP Awards .
The Amazing Spider-Man 2 was originally envisioned as the beginning of a shared fictional universe , which would have continued with two sequels and several spin-off films .
Due to its performing below expectations , all subsequent installments were cancelled and a new iteration of the character , portrayed by Tom Holland , appeared in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , beginning with the 2016 film Captain America : Civil War .