`` The Winds of Winter '' is the tenth and final episode of the sixth season of HBO 's fantasy television series Game of Thrones , and the sixtieth overall .
It was written by series co-creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , and directed by Miguel Sapochnik .
In King 's Landing , Cersei Lannister -LRB- Lena Headey -RRB- sets off wildfire beneath the Great Sept , killing its occupants , including the High Sparrow -LRB- Jonathan Pryce -RRB- and Queen Margaery Tyrell -LRB- Natalie Dormer -RRB- , causing the suicide of King Tommen Baratheon -LRB- Dean-Charles Chapman -RRB- .
Cersei subsequently claims the Iron Throne .
At the Twins , Arya Stark -LRB- Maisie Williams -RRB- kills Walder Frey -LRB- David Bradley -RRB- .
At Winterfell , Jon Snow -LRB- Kit Harington -RRB- is declared King in the North by the lords of the Northern houses , and beyond the Wall , Bran Stark -LRB- Isaac Hempstead-Wright -RRB- learns that Jon is the son of Lyanna Stark .
In the Reach , Samwell Tarly -LRB- John Bradley -RRB- arrives at the Citadel , coinciding with their announcement that winter has come .
In Essos , Daenerys Targaryen -LRB- Emilia Clarke -RRB- begins heading to Westeros alongside Tyrion Lannister -LRB- Peter Dinklage -RRB- , her entire army , the Ironborn loyal to Yara Greyjoy , the Tyrells , the Martells , and her three dragons .
`` The Winds of Winter '' received universal acclaim from critics , listing it as one of the series ' best episodes , with Matt Fowler of IGN calling it `` very surprising and satisfying . ''
Critics praised the Great Sept explosion , Lena Headey 's performance , Arya 's revenge on the Freys , the resolution to the Tower of Joy flashback , and Daenerys going to Westeros as highlights of the episode .
In the United States , the episode achieved a viewership of 8.89 million in its initial broadcast , making it the highest rated episode in the series ' history .
It was nominated for several Primetime Emmy Awards , including Headey for Outstanding Supporting Actress , and won for Outstanding Costumes for a Period/Fantasy Series , Limited Series , or Movie .