The Incredible Hulk is a 2008 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character the Hulk , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Universal Pictures .
It is the second film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe -LRB- MCU -RRB- .
The film was directed by Louis Leterrier , with a screenplay by Zak Penn. .
It stars Edward Norton , Liv Tyler , Tim Roth , Tim Blake Nelson , Ty Burrell , and William Hurt .
In The Incredible Hulk , a new backstory is established where Bruce Banner becomes the Hulk as an unwitting pawn in a military scheme to reinvigorate the supersoldier program through gamma radiation .
On the run , he attempts to cure himself of the Hulk before he is captured by General Thaddeus Ross , but his worst fears are realized when power-hungry soldier Emil Blonsky becomes a similar , but more bestial creature .
After the mixed reception to the 2003 film Hulk , Marvel Studios reacquired the rights to the character .
Leterrier , who had expressed interest in directing Iron Man , was brought onboard and Penn began work on a loose sequel that would be much closer to the comics and the 1978 television series of the same name .
In April 2007 , Norton was hired to portray Banner and to rewrite Penn 's screenplay in order to distance itself from the 2003 film and establish its own identity , although he would go uncredited for his writing .
Filming mostly took place in Toronto , Ontario , from July to November 2007 .
Over 700 visual effects shots were created in post-production using a combination of motion capture and computer-generated imagery to complete the film .
The Incredible Hulk premiered on June 8 , 2008 at the Gibson Amphitheatre in Universal City , California and was released in theaters on June 13 , 2008 , receiving generally favorable reviews by critics upon release .
Critical praise went to the improved visuals , action sequences , and the portrayal of the title character .
The film was number one at the box office , grossing over $ 263 million worldwide .
Norton was set to reprise the role of Banner in The Avengers and any other MCU installment featuring the character , but he was ultimately replaced by Mark Ruffalo , who has signed on to portray the character in all potential sequels .