The King and I is the fifth musical by the team of composer Richard Rodgers and dramatist Oscar Hammerstein II .
It is based on Margaret Landon 's novel , Anna and the King of Siam -LRB- 1944 -RRB- , which is in turn derived from the memoirs of Anna Leonowens , governess to the children of King Mongkut of Siam in the early 1860s .
The musical 's plot relates the experiences of Anna , a British schoolteacher hired as part of the King 's drive to modernize his country .
The relationship between the King and Anna is marked by conflict through much of the piece , as well as by a love to which neither can admit .
The musical premiered on March 29 , 1951 , at Broadway 's St. James Theatre .
It ran for nearly three years , making it the fourth longest-running Broadway musical in history at the time , and has had many tours and revivals .
In 1950 , theatrical attorney Fanny Holtzmann was looking for a part for her client , veteran leading lady Gertrude Lawrence .
Holtzmann realized that Landon 's book would provide an ideal vehicle and contacted Rodgers and Hammerstein , who were initially reluctant but agreed to write the musical .
The pair initially sought Rex Harrison to play the supporting part of the King , a role he had played in the 1946 film made from Landon 's book , but he was unavailable .
They settled on the young actor and television director Yul Brynner .
The musical was an immediate hit , winning Tony Awards for Best Musical , Best Actress -LRB- for Lawrence -RRB- and Best Featured Actor -LRB- for Brynner -RRB- .
Lawrence died unexpectedly of cancer a year and a half after the opening , and the role of Anna was played by several actresses during the remainder of the Broadway run of 1,246 performances .
A hit London run and U.S. national tour followed , together with a 1956 film for which Brynner won an Academy Award , and the musical was recorded several times .
In later revivals , Brynner came to dominate his role and the musical , starring in a four-year national tour culminating in a 1985 Broadway run shortly before his death .
Christopher Renshaw directed major revivals on Broadway -LRB- 1996 -RRB- , winning the Tony Award for Best Revival , and in the West End -LRB- 2000 -RRB- .
A 2015 Broadway revival won another Tony for Best Revival .
Both professional and amateur revivals of The King and I continue to be staged regularly throughout the English-speaking world .