Thomas Jefferson -LRB- April 13 -LSB- O.S. April 2 -RSB- 1743 -- July 4 , 1826 -RRB- was an American Founding Father who was the principal author of the Declaration of Independence and later served as the third President of the United States from 1801 to 1809 .
Previously , he was elected the second Vice President of the United States , serving under John Adams from 1797 to 1801 .
A proponent of democracy , republicanism , and individual rights motivating American colonists to break from Great Britain and form a new nation , he produced formative documents and decisions at both the state and national level .
He was a land owner and farmer .
Jefferson was primarily of English ancestry , born and educated in colonial Virginia .
He graduated from the College of William & Mary and briefly practiced law , at times defending slaves seeking their freedom .
During the American Revolution , he represented Virginia in the Continental Congress that adopted the Declaration , drafted the law for religious freedom as a Virginia legislator , and he served as a wartime governor -LRB- 1779 -- 1781 -RRB- .
He became the United States Minister to France in May 1785 , and subsequently the nation 's first Secretary of State in 1790 -- 1793 under President George Washington .
Jefferson and James Madison organized the Democratic-Republican Party to oppose the Federalist Party during the formation of the First Party System .
With Madison , he anonymously wrote the controversial Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions in 1798 -- 1799 , which sought to embolden states ' rights in opposition to the national government by nullifying the Alien and Sedition Acts .
As President , Jefferson pursued the nation 's shipping and trade interests against Barbary pirates and aggressive British trade policies .
He also organized the Louisiana Purchase , almost doubling the country 's territory .
As a result of peace negotiations with France , his administration reduced military forces .
He was reelected in 1804 .
Jefferson 's second term was beset with difficulties at home , including the trial of former Vice President Aaron Burr .
American foreign trade was diminished when Jefferson implemented the Embargo Act of 1807 , responding to British threats to U.S. shipping .
In 1803 , Jefferson began a controversial process of Indian tribe removal to the newly organized Louisiana Territory , and he signed the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves in 1807 .
Jefferson mastered many disciplines , which ranged from surveying and mathematics to horticulture and mechanics .
He was a proven architect in the classical tradition .
Jefferson 's keen interest in religion and philosophy earned him the presidency of the American Philosophical Society .
He shunned organized religion , but was influenced by both Christianity and deism .
He was well versed in linguistics and spoke several languages .
He founded the University of Virginia after retiring from public office .
He was a prolific letter writer and corresponded with many prominent and important people throughout his adult life .
His only full-length book is Notes on the State of Virginia -LRB- 1785 -RRB- , considered the most important American book published before 1800 .
Jefferson owned several plantations which were worked by hundreds of slaves .
Most historians now believe that , after the death of his wife in 1782 , he had a relationship with his slave Sally Hemings and fathered at least one of her children .
Historians have lauded Jefferson 's public life , noting his primary authorship of the Declaration of Independence during the Revolutionary War , his advocacy of religious freedom and tolerance in Virginia , and the Louisiana Purchase while he was president .
Various modern scholars are more critical of Jefferson 's private life , pointing out the discrepancy between his ownership of slaves and his liberal political principles , for example .
Presidential scholars , however , consistently rank Jefferson among the greatest presidents .