A thunderstorm , also known as an electrical storm , lightning storm , or thundershower , is a storm characterized by the presence of lightning and its acoustic effect on the Earth 's atmosphere , known as thunder .
Thunderstorms occur in association with a type of cloud known as a cumulonimbus .
They are usually accompanied by strong winds , heavy rain , and sometimes snow , sleet , hail , or , in contrast , no precipitation at all .
Thunderstorms may line up in a series or become a rainband , known as a squall line .
Strong or severe thunderstorms , known as supercells , rotate as do cyclones .
While most thunderstorms move with the mean wind flow through the layer of the troposphere that they occupy , vertical wind shear sometimes causes a deviation in their course at a right angle to the wind shear direction .
Thunderstorms result from the rapid upward movement of warm , moist air , sometimes along a front .
As the warm , moist air moves upward , it cools , condenses , and forms a cumulonimbus cloud that can reach heights of over 20 km .
As the rising air reaches its dew point temperature , water vapor condenses into water droplets or ice , reducing pressure locally within the thunderstorm cell .
Any precipitation falls the long distance through the clouds towards the Earth 's surface .
As the droplets fall , they collide with other droplets and become larger .
The falling droplets create a downdraft as it pulls cold air with it , and this cold air spreads out at the Earth 's surface , occasionally causing strong winds that are commonly associated with thunderstorms .
Thunderstorms can form and develop in any geographic location but most frequently within the mid-latitude , where warm , moist air from tropical latitudes collides with cooler air from polar latitudes .
Thunderstorms are responsible for the development and formation of many severe weather phenomena .
Thunderstorms , and the phenomena that occur along with them , pose great hazards .
Damage that results from thunderstorms is mainly inflicted by downburst winds , large hailstones , and flash flooding caused by heavy precipitation .
Stronger thunderstorm cells are capable of producing tornadoes and waterspouts .
There are four types of thunderstorms : single-cell , multi-cell cluster , multi-cell lines , and supercells .
Supercell thunderstorms are the strongest and the most associated with severe weather phenomena .
Mesoscale convective systems formed by favorable vertical wind shear within the tropics and subtropics can be responsible for the development of hurricanes .
Dry thunderstorms , with no precipitation , can cause the outbreak of wildfires from the heat generated from the cloud-to-ground lightning that accompanies them .
Several means are used to study thunderstorms : weather radar , weather stations , and video photography .
Past civilizations held various myths concerning thunderstorms and their development as late as the 18th century .
Beyond the Earth 's atmosphere , thunderstorms have also been observed on the planets of Jupiter , Saturn , Neptune , and , probably , Venus .