The tiger -LRB- Panthera tigris -RRB- is the largest cat species , most recognisable for their pattern of dark vertical stripes on reddish-orange fur with a lighter underside .
The species is classified in the genus Panthera with the lion , leopard , jaguar and snow leopard .
Tigers are apex predators , primarily preying on ungulates such as deer and bovids .
They are territorial and generally solitary but social animals , often requiring large contiguous areas of habitat that support their prey requirements .
This , coupled with the fact that they are indigenous to some of the more densely populated places on Earth , has caused significant conflicts with humans .
Tigers once ranged widely across eastern Eurasia , from the Black Sea in the west , to the Indian Ocean in the south , and from Kolyma to Sumatra in the east .
Over the past 100 years , they have lost 93 % of their historic range , and have been extirpated from Western and Central Asia , from the islands of Java and Bali , and from large areas of Southeast , Southern and Eastern Asia .
Today , they range from the Siberian taiga to open grasslands and tropical mangrove swamps .
The remaining six tiger subspecies have been classified as endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature -LRB- IUCN -RRB- .
The global population in the wild is estimated to number between 3,062 and 3,948 individuals , down from around 100,000 at the start of the 20th century , with most remaining populations occurring in small pockets isolated from each other , of which about 2,000 exist on the Indian subcontinent .
A 2016 global census estimated the population of wild tigers at approximately 3,890 individuals .
Major reasons for population decline include habitat destruction , habitat fragmentation and poaching .
The extent of area occupied by tigers is estimated at less than 1184911 km2 , a 41 % decline from the area estimated in the mid-1990s .
In 2016 , wildlife conservation group at WWF declared that world 's count of wild tigers has risen for the first time in a century .
Tigers are among the most recognisable and popular of the world 's charismatic megafauna .
They have featured prominently in ancient mythology and folklore , and continue to be depicted in modern films and literature .
They appear on many flags , coats of arms , and as mascots for sporting teams .
The tiger is the national animal of Bangladesh , India , Malaysia and South Korea .