Tijuana -LRB- -LSB- tiːˈwɑːnə -RSB- ; -LSB- tiˈxwana -RSB- -RRB- is the largest city in Baja California and on the Baja California Peninsula and center of the Tijuana metropolitan area , part of the international San Diego -- Tijuana metropolitan area .
As an industrial and financial center of Mexico , Tijuana exerts a strong influence on economics , education , culture , art , and politics .
As the city has become a leading center in the country , so has the surrounding metropolitan area , a major industrial and paramount metropolis in northwestern Mexico .
Currently one of the fastest growing metropolitan areas in Mexico , Tijuana maintains global city status .
, the city of Tijuana had a population of 1,696,923 .
Tijuana is located on the Gold Coast of Baja California , and is the municipal seat and cultural and commercial center of Tijuana Municipality .
Tijuana covers 70 % of the municipality but contains over 80 % of its population .
A dominant manufacturing center of the North American continent , the city maintains facilities of many multinational conglomerate companies .
In the early 21st century , Tijuana became the medical-device manufacturing capital of North America .
Tijuana is also a growing cultural center and has been recognized as an important new cultural mecca .
The city is the most visited border city in the globe ; sharing a border of about 24 km with its sister city San Diego .
More than fifty million people cross the border between these two cities every year .
This metropolitan crossing makes the San Ysidro Port of Entry the busiest land-border crossing in the world .
It is estimated that the two border crossing stations between the cities proper of San Diego and Tijuana account for 300,000 daily border crossings alone .
Tijuana is the 45th largest city in the Americas and is the westernmost city in Mexico .
According to the 2010 census , the Tijuana metropolitan area was the fifth-largest in Mexico , with a population of 1,784,034 , but rankings vary , the city -LRB- locality -RRB- itself was 6th largest and the municipality -LRB- administrative -RRB- 3rd largest nationally .
The international metropolitan region was estimated to be just over five million in 2009 and about 5,105,769 in 2010 , making it the third largest metropolitan area in the former Californias region , 19th largest metropolitan area in the Americas , and the largest bi-national conurbation that is shared between US and Mexico .
Tijuana is becoming more suburbanized like San Diego ; during the 2000s the drug violence had residents moving out of the congested urban core into isolated communities within the municipality and beyond , as evidenced by 2010 Census figures and growth patterns .
Tijuana traces its modern history to the arrival of Spanish explorers in the 16th century who were mapping the coast of the Californias .
As the American conquest of northern Mexico ended with the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo , Tijuana 's new international position on the border gave rise to a new economic and political structure .
The city was founded in July 11 , 1889 as urban development began .
Often known by its initials , T.J. , and nicknamed Gateway to Mexico , the city has historically served as a tourist center dating back to the 1880s .