Samuel Timothy `` Tim '' McGraw -LRB- born May 1 , 1967 -RRB- is an American country singer , songwriter and actor .
He has been married to singer Faith Hill since 1996 , and is the son of the late baseball player Tug McGraw .
McGraw began singing in a neotraditional country style , but starting with 1997 's Everywhere , he developed a more crossover-friendly , country pop sound , making him one of the first male Country singers of his generation to crossover to Pop .
McGraw has released fourteen studio albums -LRB- eleven for Curb Records and three for Big Machine Records -RRB- .
10 of those albums have reached number 1 on the Top Country Albums charts , with his 1994 breakthrough album Not a Moment Too Soon being the top country album of 1994 .
All of these albums have produced 65 singles , 25 of which have reached number 1 on the Hot Country Songs or Country Airplay charts .
Three of these singles -- `` It 's Your Love , '' `` Just to See You Smile , '' and `` Live Like You Were Dying '' -- were the top country songs of 1997 , 1998 , and 2004 according to Billboard Year-End .
He has also won three Grammy Awards , 14 Academy of Country Music awards , 11 Country Music Association -LRB- CMA -RRB- awards , 10 American Music Awards , and three People 's Choice Awards .
His Soul2Soul II Tour with Faith Hill is one of the highest grossing tours in country music history , and one of the top 5 among all genres of music .
McGraw has ventured into acting , with supporting roles in The Blind Side -LRB- with Sandra Bullock -RRB- , Friday Night Lights , The Kingdom , Tomorrowland , and Four Christmases -LRB- with Vince Vaughn and Reese Witherspoon -RRB- , and lead roles in Flicka -LRB- 2006 -RRB- and Country Strong -LRB- 2010 -RRB- .
He was a minority owner of the Arena Football League 's Nashville Kats .
In acknowledgement of his grandfather 's Italian heritage , McGraw was honored by the National Italian American Foundation -LRB- NIAF -RRB- in 2004 , receiving the NIAF Special Achievement Award in Music during the Foundation 's 29th Anniversary Gala .