Timur -LRB- تیمور Temūr , Chagatai : Temür , 9 April 1336 -- 18 February 1405 -RRB- , historically known as Amir Timur and Tamerlane -LRB- تيمور لنگ Temūr -LRB- - i -RRB- Lang , `` Timur the Lame '' -RRB- , was a Turco-Mongol conqueror .
As the founder of the Timurid Empire in Persia and Central Asia he became the first ruler in the Timurid dynasty .
Born into the Barlas confederation in Transoxiana on 9 April 1336 , Timur gained control of the western Chagatai Khanate by 1370 .
From that base he led military campaigns across Western , South and Central Asia , the Caucasus and southern Russia , and emerged as the most powerful ruler in the Muslim world after defeating the Mamluks of Egypt and Syria , the emerging Ottoman Empire , and the declining Delhi Sultanate .
From these conquests he founded the Timurid Empire , but this empire fragmented shortly after his death .
Timur is considered the last of the great nomadic conquerors of the Eurasian Steppe , and his empire set the stage for the rise of the more structured and lasting Gunpowder Empires in the 1500s and 1600s .
According to John Joseph Saunders , Timur 's background was Iranized and not steppe nomad .
Timur envisioned the restoration of the Mongol Empire of Genghis Khan -LRB- died 1227 -RRB- .
`` In his formal correspondence Temur continued throughout his life to portray himself as the restorer of Chinggisid rights .
He justified his Iranian , Mamluk , and Ottoman campaigns as a re-imposition of legitimate Mongol control over lands taken by usurpers .
To legitimize his conquests , Timur relied on Islamic symbols and language , referred to himself as the `` Sword of Islam '' , and patronized educational and religious institutions .
He converted nearly all the Borjigin leaders to Islam during his lifetime .
`` Temur , a non-Chinggisid , tried to build a double legitimacy based on his role as both guardian and restorer of the Mongol Empire . ''
Timur also decisively defeated the Christian Knights Hospitaller at the Siege of Smyrna , styling himself a ghazi .
By the end of his reign , Timur had gained complete control over all the remnants of the Chagatai Khanate , the Ilkhanate , and the Golden Horde , and even attempted to restore the Yuan dynasty in China .
Timur 's armies were inclusively multi-ethnic and were feared throughout Asia , Africa , and Europe , sizable parts of which his campaigns laid to waste .
Scholars estimate that his military campaigns caused the deaths of 17 million people , amounting to about 5 % of the world population at the time .
He was the grandfather of the renowned Timurid sultan , astronomer and mathematician Ulugh Beg , who ruled Central Asia from 1411 to 1449 , and the great-great-great-grandfather of Babur -LRB- 1483-1530 -RRB- , founder of the Mughal Empire , which ruled parts of South Asia for over three centuries , from 1526 until 1857 .
Timur is also recognized as a great patron of art and architecture , as he interacted with Muslim intellectuals such as Ibn Khaldun and Hafiz-i Abru .