Tina Turner -LRB- born Anna Mae Bullock ; November 26 , 1939 -RRB- , is an American-born recording artist , dancer , actress , and author , whose career has spanned more than half a century , earning her widespread recognition and numerous awards .
Born and raised in the Southeastern United States , Turner relinquished her American citizenship after obtaining Swiss citizenship in 2013 .
She began her musical career in the mid-1950s as a featured singer with Ike Turner 's Kings of Rhythm , first recording in 1958 under the name `` Little Ann . ''
Her introduction to the public as Tina Turner began in 1960 as a member of the Ike & Tina Turner Revue .
Success followed with a string of notable hits credited to the duo , including `` A Fool in Love '' , `` River Deep -- Mountain High '' -LRB- 1966 -RRB- , `` Proud Mary '' -LRB- 1971 -RRB- , and `` Nutbush City Limits '' -LRB- 1973 -RRB- , a song which she herself wrote .
In her autobiography , I , Tina , she revealed several instances of severe domestic abuse against her by Ike Turner prior to their 1976 split and subsequent 1978 divorce .
Raised a Baptist , she encountered faith with Nichiren Shoshu Buddhism in 1971 , crediting the spiritual chant of Nam Myoho Renge Kyo , which Turner claims helped her to endure during difficult times .
After her divorce from Ike Turner , she rebuilt her career through live performances .
In the 1980s , Turner launched a major comeback with another string of hits , starting in late 1983 with the single `` Let 's Stay Together '' followed by the 1984 release of her fifth solo album Private Dancer which became a worldwide success .
The album contained the song `` What 's Love Got to Do with It '' , which became Turner 's biggest hit and won three Grammy Awards including Record of the Year .
Her solo success continued thoughout the 1980s and 90s with multi-platinum albums including Break Every Rule and Foreign Affair , and with singles such as `` We Do n't Need Another Hero -LRB- Thunderdome -RRB- '' , `` The Best '' , and `` GoldenEye '' for the 1995 James Bond film of the same name .
In 1993 , `` What 's Love Got to Do with It '' was used as the title of a biographical film adapted from her autobiography , along with the film 's accompanying soundtrack album .
In addition to her musical career , Turner has also garnered success acting in films , including the role of the Acid Queen in the 1975 rock musical Tommy , a starring role alongside Mel Gibson in the 1985 action film Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome , and a cameo role in the 1993 film Last Action Hero .
One of the world 's best-selling artists of all time , she has also been referred to as The Queen of Rock 'n' Roll .
Turner has been termed the most successful female Rock 'n' Roll artist , receiving eleven Grammy Awards , including eight competitive awards and three Grammy Hall of Fame awards .
Turner has also sold more concert tickets than any other solo performer in history .
Her combined album and single sales total approximately 180 million copies worldwide , She is noted for her energetic stage presence , powerful vocals , and career longevity .
In 2008 , Turner returned from semi-retirement to embark on her Tina !
: 50th Anniversary Tour .
Turner 's tour became one of the highest selling ticketed shows of 2008 -- 09 .
Rolling Stone Magazine ranked Turner no. 63 on their list of 100 greatest artists of all time , and no. 17 on their list of 100 greatest singers of all time .
In 1991 , Turner was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame .
Turner announced in December 2016 that she has been working on `` Tina '' , a new musical based on her story , in collaboration with Phyllida Lloyd and Stage Entertainment .