To Kill a Mockingbird is a novel by Harper Lee published in 1960 .
It was immediately successful , winning the Pulitzer Prize , and has become a classic of modern American literature .
The plot and characters are loosely based on Lee 's observations of her family , her neighbors and an event that occurred near her hometown of Monroeville , Alabama , in 1936 , when she was 10 years old .
The novel is renowned for its warmth and humor , despite dealing with the serious issues of rape and racial inequality .
The narrator 's father , Atticus Finch , has served as a moral hero for many readers and as a model of integrity for lawyers .
One critic explains the novel 's impact by writing , `` In the twentieth century , To Kill a Mockingbird is probably the most widely read book dealing with race in America , and its protagonist , Atticus Finch , the most enduring fictional image of racial heroism . ''
As a Southern Gothic novel and a Bildungsroman , the primary themes of To Kill a Mockingbird involve racial injustice and the destruction of innocence .
Scholars have noted that Lee also addresses issues of class , courage , compassion , and gender roles in the American Deep South .
The book is widely taught in schools in the United States with lessons that emphasize tolerance and decry prejudice .
Despite its themes , To Kill a Mockingbird has been subject to campaigns for removal from public classrooms , often challenged for its use of racial epithets .
Reaction to the novel varied widely upon publication .
Despite the number of copies sold and its widespread use in education , literary analysis of it is sparse .
Author Mary McDonough Murphy , who collected individual impressions of To Kill a Mockingbird by several authors and public figures , calls the book `` an astonishing phenomenon '' .
In 2006 , British librarians ranked the book ahead of the Bible as one `` every adult should read before they die '' .
It was adapted into an Oscar-winning film in 1962 by director Robert Mulligan , with a screenplay by Horton Foote .
Since 1990 , a play based on the novel has been performed annually in Harper Lee 's hometown .
To Kill a Mockingbird was Lee 's only published book until Go Set a Watchman , an earlier draft of To Kill a Mockingbird , was published on July 14 , 2015 .
Lee continued to respond to her work 's impact until her death in February 2016 , although she had refused any personal publicity for herself or the novel since 1964 .