Thomas Edward Patrick Brady Jr. -LRB- born August 3 , 1977 -RRB- is an American football quarterback for the New England Patriots of the National Football League -LRB- NFL -RRB- .
He is one of only two players to win five Super Bowls -LRB- the other being Charles Haley -RRB- , the only quarterback to win five and the only player to win them all playing for one team .
After playing college football for the University of Michigan , Brady was drafted by the Patriots in the sixth round of the 2000 NFL Draft .
In Brady 's 15 seasons as a starter , he has quarterbacked the Patriots to seven Super Bowl appearances , the most for any player in history .
Brady has been honored with four Super Bowl MVP awards -LRB- Super Bowl XXXVI , XXXVIII , XLIX , and LI -RRB- , the most ever by a single player , has won two league MVP awards -LRB- 2007 and 2010 -RRB- , has been selected to 12 Pro Bowls , and has led his team to more division titles -LRB- 14 -RRB- than any other quarterback in NFL history .
As of the end of the 2016 season , Brady is fourth all-time in career passing yards , fourth in career touchdown passes , and third in career passer rating .
His career postseason record is 25 -- 9 , winning more playoff games than any other quarterback , and he has appeared in more playoff games than any player at any position .
Brady has never had a losing season as a starting quarterback in the NFL .
His 208 combined regular-season and postseason wins are also the most of any quarterback in NFL history .
Because of his accomplishments and accolades , many analysts and sportswriters consider Brady to be among the greatest quarterbacks of all time .
Due to his late draft selection , Brady is considered to be the biggest `` steal '' in the history of the NFL Draft .
For his alleged involvement in the highly publicized Deflategate football tampering scandal , Brady was suspended for the first four games of the 2016 NFL season .
Subsequently , Brady went on to win Super Bowl LI and Super Bowl MVP .
Brady has been married to Brazilian supermodel Gisele Bündchen since 2009 .