`` Touch My Body '' is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey , taken from her eleventh studio album , E = MC ² -LRB- 2008 -RRB- .
Carey co-produced the song with Christopher `` Tricky '' Stewart , and they co-wrote it with Crystal `` Cri $ tyle '' Johnson , and Terius `` The Dream '' Nash .
`` Touch My Body '' was released as the album 's lead single on February 12 , 2008 .
The song 's lyrics feature a double message , with the first describing sexual fantasies with her lover , while also jokingly warning him against recording or releasing information regarding their rendezvous .
The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , with many highlighting the song 's light pop melody and hook ; however , it also garnered some backlash from certain music reviewers , who felt the song did not properly represent the singer 's acclaimed 5-octave vocal range .
`` Touch My Body '' became Carey 's eighteenth chart topper on the Billboard Hot 100 , making Carey the solo artist with the most number one singles in United States history , surpassing the record held by Elvis Presley .
Additionally , it gave Carey her 79th week atop the chart , tying Presley for most weeks at number one .
Throughout Europe , the song also achieved high charting , peaking within the top five on the charts in Italy , Japan , New Zealand , Switzerland , and the United Kingdom .
Carey performed `` Touch My Body '' on several live televised events and programs , debuting it on Saturday Night Live as a two-piece performance .
Similarly , Carey opened the Good Morning America `` Summer Concert Series '' on April 25 , 2008 , singing the song , as well as two other singles from E = MC ² .
Similar renditions took place at the season premiere party of The Hills , as well as a mash-up of the song with `` I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time '' at the Teen Choice Awards .
Aside from reprising performances of the British programs The Sunday Night Project and The Paul O'Grady Show , and German talent show Deutschland sucht den Superstar , the song was included on the set-list of Carey 's North American Angels Advocate Tour , held throughout 2009 and 2010 .
The song 's music video was directed by filmmaker Brett Ratner , who had previously worked with Carey on five other music videos .
It follows around a story revolving around a computer employee 's fantasy as he visits Carey 's home .
As he fixes her computer , he enters a fantasy in which the pair perform several activities together , including pillow fights , laser tag , Guitar Hero , slot cars , and frisbee throwing , all while Carey shows off her figure in several revealing outfits .
The music video won in the category of `` Best Comedic Video '' at the 2008 BET Awards , and won the `` MTV Video Vanguard Award '' at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards Japan .
Additionally , the video was nominated for `` Best Female Video '' at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards .