A touchscreen is an input and output device normally layered on the top of an electronic visual display of an information processing system .
A user can give input or control the information processing system through simple or multi-touch gestures by touching the screen with a special stylus and/or one or more fingers .
Some touchscreens use ordinary or specially coated gloves to work while others may only work using a special stylus/pen .
The user can use the touchscreen to react to what is displayed and to control how it is displayed ; for example , zooming to increase the text size .
The touchscreen enables the user to interact directly with what is displayed , rather than using a mouse , touchpad , or any other such device -LRB- other than a stylus , which is optional for most modern touchscreens -RRB- .
Touchscreens are common in devices such as game consoles , personal computers , tablet computers , electronic voting machines , point of sale systems , and smartphones .
They can also be attached to computers or , as terminals , to networks .
They also play a prominent role in the design of digital appliances such as personal digital assistants -LRB- PDAs -RRB- and some e-readers .
The popularity of smartphones , tablets , and many types of information appliances is driving the demand and acceptance of common touchscreens for portable and functional electronics .
Touchscreens are found in the medical field and in heavy industry , as well as for automated teller machines -LRB- ATMs -RRB- , and kiosks such as museum displays or room automation , where keyboard and mouse systems do not allow a suitably intuitive , rapid , or accurate interaction by the user with the display 's content .
Historically , the touchscreen sensor and its accompanying controller-based firmware have been made available by a wide array of after-market system integrators , and not by display , chip , or motherboard manufacturers .
Display manufacturers and chip manufacturers worldwide have acknowledged the trend toward acceptance of touchscreens as a highly desirable user interface component and have begun to integrate touchscreens into the fundamental design of their products .