Tropic Thunder is a 2008 satirical action comedy film co-written , produced , and directed by Ben Stiller .
Stiller , Robert Downey Jr. and Jack Black star as a group of prima donna actors who are making a fictional Vietnam War film .
When their frustrated director drops them in the middle of a jungle , they are forced to rely on their acting skills to survive the real action and danger .
It was written by Stiller , Justin Theroux and Etan Cohen .
The film was an international co-production between Germany , the United Kingdom , and the United States .
DreamWorks Pictures and Red Hour Films produced it .
Stiller 's idea for the film originated while playing a minor role in Empire of the Sun , and he later enlisted Theroux and Cohen to help complete the script .
After the film was green-lit in 2006 , filming took place in 2007 on the Hawaiian island of Kaua'i over thirteen weeks and was later deemed the largest film production in the island 's history .
The film had an extensive marketing promotion , including faux websites for the three main characters and their fictional films , airing a fictional television special , and selling the energy drink advertised in the film , `` Booty Sweat '' , directed by Dr. Hemlock .
The film received generally positive reviews , with critics praising the film 's characters , story , faux trailers , and the performances of Stiller , Downey , and Tom Cruise , though the depiction of the mentally handicapped proved controversial .
The film 's soundtrack and score debuted on August 5 , 2008 , before the film 's theatrical release .
Paramount Pictures and DreamWorks released the film in the US on August 13 , 2008 .
In its North American opening weekend , the film earned $ 26 million and retained the number one position for the first three weekends of release .
Downey received Academy Award , BAFTA Award , and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for his performance , with both him and Cruise receiving nominations for a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor -- Motion Picture .
The film grossed more than $ 188 million worldwide before its release on home video on November 18 , 2008 .