True Detective is an American anthology crime drama television series created and written by Nic Pizzolatto .
The series , broadcast by the premium cable network HBO in the United States , premiered on January 12 , 2014 .
Each season of the series is structured as a disparate , self-contained narrative , employing new cast ensembles and following various sets of characters and settings .
The first season , starring Matthew McConaughey , Woody Harrelson , Michelle Monaghan , Michael Potts , and Tory Kittles , takes place in Louisiana and follows a pair of Louisiana State Police homicide detectives , and their pursuit of a serial killer over a 17-year period .
The second season , starring Colin Farrell , Rachel McAdams , Taylor Kitsch , Kelly Reilly , and Vince Vaughn , is set in California , and focuses on three detectives from three cooperating police departments and a criminal-turned-businessman as they investigate a series of crimes they believe are linked to the murder of a corrupt politician .
The first season received generally excellent reviews from critics and earned high ratings for HBO .
It was nominated for and won numerous awards and other accolades , chiefly for its acting , cinematography , writing , and direction .
Reception to the second season was more divided , though the show maintained high viewership for HBO .
In July 2016 , HBO head of programming Casey Bloys confirmed plans for a potential third season , stating , `` It is not dead .
I talked to Nic about it and both Nic and HBO are open to another season .
I do n't think Nic has a take and he 's working on some other projects .
We 're open to somebody else writing it and Nic supervising it .
It 's a valuable franchise , it 's not dead , we just do n't have a take for a third season yet . ''
This came shortly after McConaughey said he would hypothetically be interested in reprising his role as Rust Cohle in a third season .
In March 2017 , it was revealed that Pizzolatto has written the first two episodes of a potential third season and that David Milch joined the creative team .