Tyra Lynne Banks -LRB- born December 4 , 1973 -RRB- is an American television personality , producer , businesswoman , actress , author , former model and occasional singer .
Born in Inglewood , California , she began her career as a model at age 15 , and was the first African American woman to be featured on the covers of GQ and the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue , on which she appeared twice .
She was a Victoria 's Secret Angel from 1997 to 2005 .
By the early 2000s , Banks was one of the world 's top-earning models .
Banks began acting on television in 1993 on The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air , and made her film debut in Higher Learning in 1995 .
She had major roles such as Eve in Disney Channel 's Life-Size and Zoe in the box office hit Coyote Ugly .
She had small roles in the romantic film Love & Basketball and horror film Halloween : Resurrection , and appeared in television series Gossip Girl and Glee .
In 2003 , Banks created and began presenting the long-running reality television series America 's Next Top Model , which she executive produced and presented for the first twenty-two seasons until the series ' cancellation in October 2015 .
She remained executive producer for the revival of the series , and enlisted Rita Ora as host for the twenty-third cycle before reassuming the duties herself for the upcoming twenty-fourth cycle .
Banks was the co-creator of True Beauty , and had her own talk show , The Tyra Banks Show , which aired on The CW for five seasons and won two Daytime Emmy awards for Outstanding Talk Show Informative .
She co-hosted the talk show FABLife for two months .
In 2017 , Banks will replace Nick Cannon as host of America 's Got Talent for its 12th season .
In 2010 , she published a young adult novel titled Modelland , based on her life as a model which topped The New York Times Best Seller list in 2011 .
Banks is one of four African Americans and seven women to have repeatedly ranked among the world 's most influential people by TIME magazine .