U2 are an Irish rock band from Dublin formed in 1976 .
The group consists of Bono -LRB- lead vocals and rhythm guitar -RRB- , the Edge -LRB- lead guitar , keyboards , and backing vocals -RRB- , Adam Clayton -LRB- bass guitar -RRB- , and Larry Mullen Jr. -LRB- drums and percussion -RRB- .
Initially rooted in post-punk , U2 's sound grew to incorporate influences from many genres of popular music , yet has maintained an anthemic sound built on Bono 's expressive vocals and the Edge 's effects-based guitar textures .
Their lyrics , often embellished with spiritual imagery , focus on personal themes and sociopolitical concerns .
Popular for their live performances , the group have staged several ambitious and elaborate tours over their career .
The band formed at Mount Temple Comprehensive School in 1976 when the members were teenagers with limited musical proficiency .
Within four years , they signed with Island Records and released their debut album , Boy -LRB- 1980 -RRB- .
Subsequent work such as their first UK number-one album , War -LRB- 1983 -RRB- , and the singles `` Sunday Bloody Sunday '' and `` Pride -LRB- In the Name of Love -RRB- '' helped establish U2 's reputation as a politically and socially conscious group .
By the mid-1980s , they had become renowned globally for their live act , highlighted by their performance at Live Aid in 1985 .
The group 's fifth album , The Joshua Tree -LRB- 1987 -RRB- , made them international superstars and was their greatest critical and commercial success .
Topping music charts around the world , it produced their only number-one singles in the US , `` With or Without You '' and `` I Still Have n't Found What I 'm Looking For '' .
Facing a backlash and creative stagnation , U2 reinvented themselves in the 1990s through a new musical direction and public image .
Beginning with their acclaimed seventh album , Achtung Baby -LRB- 1991 -RRB- , and the multimedia intensive Zoo TV Tour , the band integrated influences from alternative rock , electronic dance music , and industrial music into their sound , and embraced a more ironic , flippant image .
This experimentation continued through their ninth album , Pop -LRB- 1997 -RRB- , and the PopMart Tour , which were mixed successes .
U2 regained critical and commercial favour with the records All That You Ca n't Leave Behind -LRB- 2000 -RRB- and How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb -LRB- 2004 -RRB- , which established a more conventional , mainstream sound for the group .
Their U2 360 ° Tour of 2009 -- 2011 is the highest-attended and highest-grossing concert tour in history .
The group 's thirteenth album , Songs of Innocence -LRB- 2014 -RRB- , was released at no cost through the iTunes Store , but received criticism for its automatic placement in users ' music libraries .
U2 have released 13 studio albums and are one of the world 's best-selling music artists of all time , having sold more than 170 million records worldwide .
They have won 22 Grammy Awards , more than any other band , and in 2005 , they were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in their first year of eligibility .
Rolling Stone ranked U2 at number 22 on its list of the `` 100 Greatest Artists of All Time '' .
Throughout their career , as a band and as individuals , they have campaigned for human rights and philanthropic causes , including Amnesty International , Jubilee 2000 , the ONE/DATA campaigns , Product Red , War Child , and Music Rising .