Unapologetic is the seventh studio album by Barbadian singer Rihanna .
It was released on November 19 , 2012 , by Def Jam Recordings and SRP Records .
It was recorded between June and November 2012 , during promotion of her sixth album , Talk That Talk -LRB- 2011 -RRB- .
As executive producer , Rihanna enlisted previous collaborators The-Dream , David Guetta , Chase & Status , and StarGate to work alongside new collaborators such as Parker Ighile , Mike Will Made-It , and Labrinth .
Unapologetic is mainly a pop , dubstep and R&B album that incorporates elements of hip hop , EDM and reggae in its production , similar to the sound of her previous albums Talk That Talk and Rated R -LRB- 2009 -RRB- .
Unapologetic received generally mixed reviews from critics , with some reviewers describing its music as interesting , while others criticized its lyrical content and rushed nature .
The album won a Grammy Award for Best Urban Contemporary Album at the 2014 ceremony .
It debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 238,000 copies , becoming Rihanna 's first number one album on the chart and best-selling debut week of her career .
The album also became the singer 's third , fourth , and fifth consecutive number one album in the United Kingdom , Norway , and Switzerland , respectively .
As of December 2014 , Unapologetic has sold over four million copies worldwide .
The album produced seven singles including the international hits `` Diamonds '' and `` Stay '' .
The former peaked at number one on the UK Singles Chart and the US Billboard Hot 100 where it became Rihanna 's twelfth number one song , tying her with Madonna and The Supremes for fourth most number one songs in the history of the chart .
Prior to its release , Rihanna promoted the album with the 777 Tour which consisted of a seven-date promotional tour in which she performed seven concerts each in a different city in North America and Europe in seven days .
To further promote Unapologetic , Rihanna embarked on her fourth worldwide tour entitled the Diamonds World Tour .