The United States of America -LRB- USA -RRB- , commonly known as the United States -LRB- U.S. -RRB- or America , is a constitutional federal republic composed of 50 states , a federal district , five major self-governing territories , and various possessions .
Forty-eight of the fifty states and the federal district are contiguous and located in North America between Canada and Mexico .
The state of Alaska is in the northwest corner of North America , bordered by Canada to the east and across the Bering Strait from Russia to the west .
The state of Hawaii is an archipelago in the mid-Pacific Ocean .
The U.S. territories are scattered about the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea .
Nine time zones are covered .
The geography , climate and wildlife of the country are extremely diverse .
At 3.8 million square miles -LRB- 9.8 million km2 -RRB- and with over 324 million people , the United States is the world 's third - or fourth-largest country by total area , third-largest by land area , and the third-most populous .
It is one of the world 's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations , and is home to the world 's largest immigrant population .
The capital is Washington , D.C. , and the largest city is New York City ; nine other major metropolitan areas -- each with at least 4.5 million inhabitants and the largest having more than 13 million people -- are Los Angeles , Chicago , Dallas , Houston , Philadelphia , Miami , Atlanta , Boston , and San Francisco .
Paleo-Indians migrated from Asia to the North American mainland at least 15,000 years ago .
European colonization began in the 16th century .
The United States emerged from 13 British colonies along the East Coast .
Numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies following the Seven Years ' War led to the American Revolution , which began in 1775 .
On July 4 , 1776 , during the course of the American Revolutionary War , the colonies unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence .
The war ended in 1783 with recognition of the independence of the United States by Great Britain , representing the first successful war of independence against a European power .
The current constitution was adopted in 1788 , after the Articles of Confederation , adopted in 1781 , were felt to have provided inadequate federal powers .
The first ten amendments , collectively named the Bill of Rights , were ratified in 1791 and designed to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties .
The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century , displacing Native American tribes , acquiring new territories , and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848 .
During the second half of the 19th century , the American Civil War led to the end of legal slavery in the country .
By the end of that century , the United States extended into the Pacific Ocean , and its economy , driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution , began to soar .
The Spanish -- American War and confirmed the country 's status as a global military power .
The United States emerged from as a global superpower , the first country to develop nuclear weapons , the only country to use them in warfare , and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council .
The end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world 's sole superpower .
The U.S. is a founding member of the United Nations , World Bank , International Monetary Fund , Organization of American States -LRB- OAS -RRB- , and other international organizations .
The United States is a highly developed country , with the world 's largest economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP .
Though its population is only 4.3 % of the world total , Americans hold nearly 40 % of the total wealth in the world .
The United States ranks among the highest in several measures of socioeconomic performance , including average wage , human development , per capita GDP , and productivity per person .
While the U.S. economy is considered post-industrial , characterized by the dominance of services and knowledge economy , the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the world .
Accounting for approximately a quarter of global GDP and a third of global military spending , the United States is the world 's foremost economic and military power .
The United States is a prominent political and cultural force internationally , and a leader in scientific research and technological innovations .