The United States Army -LRB- USA -RRB- is the largest branch of the United States Armed Forces and performs land-based military operations .
It is one of the seven uniformed services of the United States and is designated as the Army of the United States in the United States Constitution , Article 2 , Section 2 , Clause 1 and United States Code , Title 10 , Subtitle B , Chapter 301 , Section 3001 .
As the largest and senior branch of the U.S. military , the modern U.S. Army has its roots in the Continental Army , which was formed -LRB- 14 June 1775 -RRB- to fight the American Revolutionary War -LRB- 1775 -- 1783 -RRB- -- before the U.S. was established as a country .
After the Revolutionary War , the Congress of the Confederation created the United States Army on 3 June 1784 , to replace the disbanded Continental Army .
The United States Army considers itself descended from the Continental Army , and dates its institutional inception from the origin of that armed force in 1775 .
As a uniformed military service , the Army is part of the Department of the Army , which is one of the three military departments of the Department of Defense .
The U.S. Army is headed by a civilian senior appointed civil servant , the Secretary of the Army -LRB- SECARMY -RRB- , and by a chief military officer , the Chief of Staff of the Army -LRB- CSA -RRB- who is also a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
In the fiscal year 2017 , the projected end strength for the Regular Army -LRB- USA -RRB- was 460,000 soldiers ; the Army National Guard -LRB- ARNG -RRB- had 335,000 soldiers , and the United States Army Reserve -LRB- USAR -RRB- had 195,000 soldiers ; the combined-component strength of the U.S. Army was 990,000 soldiers .
As a branch of the armed forces , the mission of the U.S. Army is `` to fight and win our Nation 's wars , by providing prompt , sustained , land dominance , across the full range of military operations and the spectrum of conflict , in support of combatant commanders . ''
The branch participates in conflicts worldwide and is the major ground-based offensive and defensive force of the United States .