Up All Night is the debut studio album by English-Irish group One Direction , released by Syco Records in November 2011 in Ireland and the United Kingdom , followed by a worldwide release during 2012 .
Four months after finishing third in the seventh series of British reality singing contest The X Factor in December 2010 , One Direction began recording the album in Sweden , UK and the United States , working with a variety of writers and producers .
The album is predominantly a pop music album which orientates into pop rock , dance-pop , teen pop and power pop .
The album 's lyrical content regards being young , relationships , heartbreak and empowerment .
Staged in support of the album , One Direction performed the album 's songs live on televised shows , at awards ceremonies , and during their worldwide Up All Night Tour .
The album received generally favourable reviews from contemporary music critics , many of whom appreciated the album 's combination of melodic song craft and catchy , pop-oriented material that , while slickly produced , avoided the commercial cynicism and adult contemporary posturing of some of their '80s and '90s forebears .
An international success , the album topped the charts in sixteen countries and , by December 2012 , has sold over 4.5 million copies worldwide .
The album bowed at number two on the UK Albums Chart and ultimately became the UK 's fastest-selling debut album of 2011 .
Up All Night debuted to number one on the United States Billboard 200 , selling 176,000 copies in its first week .
According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry -LRB- IFPI -RRB- , Up All Night was the third global best-selling album of 2012 with sales of 4.5 million copies .
One Direction finished 2012 with two of that year 's top five best-selling albums in the United States ; Up All Night at number three and their second studio album , Take Me Home , at number five , making the boy band the first act to place two albums in the year-end top five in the Nielsen SoundScan era .
In addition , Up All Night became the best-selling album by a group and the third best-selling debut album of 2012 .
Four singles were released from the album , including the UK Singles Chart top ten hits `` What Makes You Beautiful '' , `` Got ta Be You '' , and `` One Thing '' .