The Uruguay national football team represents Uruguay in international association football and is controlled by the Uruguayan Football Association , the governing body for football in Uruguay .
The current head coach is Óscar Tabárez .
The Uruguayan team is commonly referred to as La Celeste -LRB- The Sky Blue -RRB- .
The Uruguayan team recently won the 2011 Copa América .
They have won the Copa América 15 times , being the team that has won the tournament on most occasions .
The team has won the FIFA World Cup twice , including the first World Cup in 1930 as hosts , defeating Argentina 4 -- 2 in the final .
They won their second title in 1950 , upsetting host Brazil 2 -- 1 in the final match , which received an attendance higher than any football match ever .
They have won the Gold Medals in football at the Summer Olympics twice , in 1924 and 1928 recognized by FIFA as World Cup , before the creation of the World Cup .
Uruguay also won the 1980 Mundialito , a tournament among former World Cup champions .
In total , Uruguay have won 20 official titles , a world record for the most international titles held by any country .
Another unique achievement of Uruguay is that it ´ s the only nation in world football to organize multiple major international tournaments in own country and win them all .
La Celeste won 7 Copa América tournaments , 1 World Cup and Mundialito , all staged in Uruguay .
Their success is amplified by the fact that the nation has a very small population of around 3.4 million inhabitants -LRB- 2011 est. -RRB- .
Uruguay is by far the smallest country in the world to have won a World Cup in terms of population , 1.75 million inhabitants in 1930 .
The second-smallest country , by population , to have won the World Cup is Argentina with a population of nearly 28 million people in 1978 .
Uruguay is also the smallest country ever to win any World Cup medals ; only five nations with a currently smaller population than Uruguay 's have ever participated in any World Cup : Northern Ireland -LRB- three times -RRB- , Slovenia -LRB- twice -RRB- , Wales , Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago .