USS Constitution is a wooden-hulled , three-masted heavy frigate of the United States Navy , named by President George Washington after the Constitution of the United States of America .
She is the world 's oldest commissioned naval vessel afloat .
Constitution was launched in 1797 , one of six original frigates authorized for construction by the Naval Act of 1794 and the third constructed .
Joshua Humphreys designed the frigates to be the young Navy 's capital ships , and so Constitution and her sisters were larger and more heavily armed and built than standard frigates of the period .
Constitution was built in the North End of Boston , Massachusetts at Edmund Hartt 's shipyard .
Her first duties with the newly formed U.S. Navy were to provide protection for American merchant shipping during the Quasi-War with France and to defeat the Barbary pirates in the First Barbary War .
Constitution is most noted for her actions during the War of 1812 against the United Kingdom , when she captured numerous merchant ships and defeated five British warships : , , , , and .
The battle with Guerriere earned her the nickname of `` Old Ironsides '' and public adoration that has repeatedly saved her from scrapping .
She continued to serve as flagship in the Mediterranean and African squadrons , and circled the world in the 1840s .
During the American Civil War , she served as a training ship for the United States Naval Academy .
She carried American artwork and industrial displays to the Paris Exposition of 1878 .
Constitution was retired from active service in 1881 , and served as a receiving ship until designated a museum ship in 1907 .
In 1934 , she completed a three-year , 90-port tour of the nation .
Constitution sailed under her own power for her 200th birthday in 1997 , and again in August 2012 to commemorate the 200th anniversary of her victory over Guerriere .
Constitutions stated mission today is to promote understanding of the Navy 's role in war and peace through educational outreach , historical demonstration , and active participation in public events as part of the Naval History & Heritage Command .
As a fully commissioned U.S. Navy ship , her crew of 60 officers and sailors participate in ceremonies , educational programs , and special events while keeping Constitution open to visitors year round and providing free tours .
The officers and crew are all active-duty U.S. Navy personnel and the assignment is considered to be special duty in the U.S. Navy .
Traditionally , command of the vessel is assigned to a Navy commander .
She is usually berthed at Pier 1 of the former Charlestown Navy Yard , at one end of Boston 's Freedom Trail .
In May 2015 , Constitution entered Dry Dock 1 to begin a three-year restoration program .