Uzbekistan -LRB- -LSB- ʊzˈbɛkᵻˌstæn , _ - ˌstɑːn -RSB- , -LSB- ʊzˌbɛkᵻˈstɑːn , _ ʌz - , _ - ˈstæn -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Republic of Uzbekistan -LRB- Oʻzbekiston Respublikasi , Ўзбекистон Республикаси Республика Узбекистан -RRB- , is one of only two doubly landlocked countries in the world .
Located in Central Asia , it is a unitary , constitutional , presidential republic , comprising twelve provinces , one autonomous republic and a capital city .
Uzbekistan is bordered by five landlocked countries : Kazakhstan to the north ; Tajikistan to the southeast ; Kyrgyzstan to the northeast ; Afghanistan to the south ; and Turkmenistan to the southwest .
Once part of the Turkic Khaganate and later Timurid Empires , the region that today includes the Republic of Uzbekistan was conquered in the early 16th century by Eastern Turkic-speaking nomads .
The area was gradually incorporated into the Russian Empire during the 19th century , and in 1924 what is now Uzbekistan became a bordered constituent republic of the Soviet Union , known as the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic -LRB- Uzbek SSR -RRB- .
Following the breakup of the Soviet Union , it declared independence as the Republic of Uzbekistan on 31 August 1991 -LRB- officially celebrated the following day -RRB- .
Uzbekistan is officially a democratic , secular , unitary , constitutional republic with a diverse cultural heritage .
The country 's official language is Uzbek , a Turkic language written in the Latin alphabet and spoken natively by approximately 85 % of the population ; however , Russian remains in widespread use .
Uzbeks constitute 81 % of the population , followed by Russians -LRB- 5.4 % -RRB- , Tajiks -LRB- 4.0 % -RRB- , Kazakhs -LRB- 3.0 % -RRB- , and others -LRB- 6.5 % -RRB- .
A majority of Uzbeks are non-denominational Muslims .
Uzbekistan is a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States -LRB- CIS -RRB- , Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe -LRB- OSCE -RRB- , UN , and the SCO .
While officially a democratic republic , non-governmental human rights organizations define Uzbekistan as `` an authoritarian state with limited civil rights '' .
Uzbekistan 's economy relies mainly on commodity production , including cotton , gold , uranium , and natural gas .
Despite the declared objective of transition to a market economy , its government continues to maintain economic controls which imports in favour of domestic `` import substitution '' .