Vallejo -LRB- -LSB- vəˈleɪ.oʊ , _ - hoʊ -RSB- ; Spanish : -LSB- baˈʎexo -RSB- -RRB- is a waterfront port city in Solano County , California , located in the North Bay region of the San Francisco Bay Area .
The population was 115,942 at the 2010 census .
It is the tenth most populous city in the San Francisco Bay Area , and the largest in Solano County .
Vallejo sits on the northeastern shore of San Pablo Bay , 30 miles north of San Francisco .
The city is named after General Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo , a native Californio , leading proponent of California 's statehood , and one of the first members of the California State Senate ; the neighboring city of Benicia is named for his wife , Francisca Benicia Carillo de Vallejo .
Vallejo is home to the Six Flags Discovery Kingdom theme park , the now-defunct Mare Island Naval Shipyard , and the regional office for Region 5 of the United States Forest Service .
The colleges and universities in Vallejo are California Maritime Academy , the Vallejo Center campus of Solano Community College , and Touro University California .
Ferry service runs from a terminal on Mare Island Strait to San Francisco , through the BayLink division of SolTrans .
Vallejo has twice served as the capital of the state of California : once in 1852 and again in 1853 , both periods being brief .
The State Capitol building burned to the ground in the 1880s and the Vallejo Fire Department requested aid from the Fire Department at Mare Island Naval Shipyard .
As there were no bridges at that time , the Mare Island Fire Department had to be ferried across the Napa River , arriving to find only the foundation remaining .
This was the first recorded mutual aid response in the state of California .
Some of the first Europeans drawn to the Vallejo area were attracted by the sulfur springs ; in the year 1902 the area was named Blue Rock Springs .
It was also known as White Sulfur Springs and that was the name of the road leading to it from town , today shortened to `` Springs Road '' .
Vallejo is best known for the Zodiac Killer and being the hometown of Bay Area rappers E-40 and Mac Dre .