The Vandals were an East Germanic tribe , or group of tribes , who were first heard of in southern Poland , but later moved around Europe establishing kingdoms in Spain and later North Africa in the 5th century .
The Vandals are believed to have migrated from southern Scandinavia to the area between the lower Oder and Vistula rivers during the 2nd century BC and to have settled in Silesia from around 120 BC .
They are associated with the Przeworsk culture and were possibly the same people as the Lugii .
Expanding into Dacia during the Marcomannic Wars and to Pannonia during the Crisis of the Third Century , the Vandals were confined to Pannonia by the Goths around 330 AD , where they received permission to settle by Constantine the Great .
Around 400 , raids by the Huns forced many of the Germanic tribes like the Goths to migrate to the Roman Empire , and fearing that they might be targeted next , the Vandals were pushed westwards crossing the Rhine into Gaul along with other tribes in 406 .
In 409 , the Vandals crossed the Pyrenees into the Iberian Peninsula , where their main groups , the Hasdingi and the Silingi , settled in Gallaecia -LRB- northwest -RRB- and Baetica -LRB- south central -RRB- respectively .
After the Visigoths invaded Iberia , the Iranian Alans and Silingi Vandals voluntarily subjected to the rule of Hasdingian leader Gunderic , who was pushed from Gallaecia to Baetica by a Roman-Suebi coalition in 419 .
In 429 , under king Genseric , the Vandals entered North Africa .
By 439 they established a kingdom which included the Roman province of Africa as well as Sicily , Corsica , Sardinia , Malta and the Balearic Islands .
They fended off several Roman attempts to recapture the African province , and sacked the city of Rome in 455 .
Their kingdom collapsed in the Vandalic War of 533 -- 4 , in which Justinian I managed to reconquer the province for the Eastern Roman Empire .
Renaissance and Early Modern writers characterized the Vandals as barbarians , `` sacking and looting '' Rome .
This led to the use of the term `` vandalism '' to describe any senseless destruction , particularly the `` barbarian '' defacing of artwork .
However , modern historians tend to regard the Vandals during the transitional period from Late Antiquity to the Early Middle Ages as perpetuators , not destroyers , of Roman culture .