Vatican City -LRB- -LSB- ˈvætᵻkən_ˈsɪti -RSB- Città del Vaticano -LSB- tʃitˈta ddel vatiˈkaːno -RSB- Civitas Vaticana -RRB- , officially Vatican City State or the State of Vatican City -LRB- -LSB- Stato della Città del Vaticano , links = no -RSB- -LSB- Status Civitatis Vaticanae , links = no -RSB- -RRB- , is a walled enclave within the city of Rome .
With an area of approximately 44 hectares -LRB- 110 acres -RRB- , and a population of 1,000 , it is the smallest state in the world by both area and population .
However , formally it is not sovereign , with sovereignty being held by the Holy See , the only entity of public international law that has diplomatic relations with almost every country in the world .
It is an ecclesiastical or sacerdotal-monarchical state -LRB- a type of theocracy -RRB- ruled by the Bishop of Rome -- the Pope .
The highest state functionaries are all Catholic clergy of various national origins .
Since the return of the Popes from Avignon in 1377 , they have generally resided at the Apostolic Palace within what is now Vatican City , although at times residing instead in the Quirinal Palace in Rome or elsewhere .
Vatican City is distinct from the Holy See -LRB- -LSB- Sancta Sedes , links = no -RSB- -RRB- , which dates back to early Christianity and is the main episcopal see of 1.2 billion Latin and Eastern Catholic adherents around the globe .
The independent city-state , on the other hand , came into existence in 1929 by the Lateran Treaty between the Holy See and Italy , which spoke of it as a new creation , not as a vestige of the much larger Papal States -LRB- 756 -- 1870 -RRB- , which had previously encompassed much of central Italy .
According to the terms of the treaty , the Holy See has `` full ownership , exclusive dominion , and sovereign authority and jurisdiction '' over the city-state .
Within Vatican City are religious and cultural sites such as St. Peter 's Basilica , the Sistine Chapel and the Vatican Museums .
They feature some of the world 's most famous paintings and sculptures .
The unique economy of Vatican City is supported financially by the sale of postage stamps and tourist mementos , fees for admission to museums , and the sale of publications .