Vietnam -LRB- ˌ ; -LSB- vîət nāːm -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Socialist Republic of Vietnam -LRB- SRV ; , is the easternmost country on the Indochina Peninsula in Southeast Asia .
With an estimated 92.7 million inhabitants , it is the world 's 14th-most-populous country , and the ninth-most-populous Asian country .
Vietnam is bordered by China to the north , Laos to the northwest , Cambodia to the southwest , Thailand across the Gulf of Thailand to the southwest , and the Philippines , Malaysia and Indonesia across the South China Sea to the east and southeast .
Its capital city has been Hanoi since the reunification of North and South Vietnam in 1976 , with Ho Chi Minh City as a historical city as well .
The northern part of Vietnam was part of Imperial China for over a millennium , from 111 BC to AD 939 .
An independent Vietnamese state was formed in 939 , following a Vietnamese victory in the Battle of Bạch Đằng River .
Successive Vietnamese imperial dynasties flourished as the nation expanded geographically and politically into Southeast Asia , until the Indochina Peninsula was colonized by the French in the mid-19th century .
Following a Japanese occupation in the 1940s , the Vietnamese fought French rule in the First Indochina War , eventually expelling the French in 1954 .
Thereafter , Vietnam was divided politically into two rival states , North Vietnam -LRB- officially the Democratic Republic of Vietnam -RRB- , and South Vietnam -LRB- officially the Republic of Vietnam -RRB- .
Conflict between the two sides intensified in what is known as the Vietnam War .
The war ended with a North Vietnamese victory in 1975 .
Vietnam was then unified under a communist government but remained impoverished and politically isolated .
In 1986 , the government initiated a series of economic and political reforms which began Vietnam 's path towards integration into the world economy .
By 2000 , it had established diplomatic relations with all nations .
Since 2000 , Vietnam 's economic growth rate has been among the highest in the world , and , in 2011 , it had the highest Global Growth Generators Index among 11 major economies .
Its successful economic reforms resulted in its joining the World Trade Organization in 2007 .
It is also a member of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie .
Vietnam remains one of the world 's four remaining one-party socialist states officially espousing communism .