Views is the fourth studio album by Canadian rapper Drake .
It was released on April 29 , 2016 , by Young Money Entertainment , Cash Money Records and Republic Records .
Recording sessions took place from 2015 to 2016 , with both Drake and his longtime collaborator and record producer 40 serving as the records executive producers .
40 also primarily handled the production on the album alongside each of these several other record producers such as Nineteen85 , Maneesh Bidaye , Kanye West and Jordan Ullman , among others .
The album contains the elements of genres such as R&B , dancehall , hip hop and pop , among others .
The album was supported by five singles : `` Hotline Bling '' -LRB- which was included as a bonus track -RRB- , `` One Dance '' featuring Wizkid and Kyla , `` Pop Style '' featuring The Throne -LRB- Jay Z and Kanye West -RRB- , `` Controlla '' and `` Too Good '' featuring Rihanna .
`` One Dance '' became Drake 's first number-one single in 10 countries as the lead artist , including Australia , Canada , the United Kingdom and the United States .
The single spent 10 weeks at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and 15 weeks on the UK Singles Chart .
Views was met with lukewarm reviews from critics , many of whom found it to be an overlong retread of Drake 's previous work .
Despite this , it spent 13 non-consecutive weeks at number one on the Billboard 200 .
Views became the first album to accumulate one-billion streams on Apple Music .
On December 1 , 2016 , Views was certified Quadruple Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- .
As of January 2017 , Views sold 1.61 million copies and a total of 4.14 million album-equivalent units in the United States .
Views was nominated for Album of the Year and Best Rap Album at the 59th Grammy Awards .
Additionally , `` Hotline Bling '' won for Best Rap/Sung Performance and Best Rap Song , respectively .
The single version of `` Pop Style '' featuring The Throne was nominated for Best Rap Performance .