The Visigoths -LRB- UK : -LSB- ˈvɪzɪˌɡɒθs -RSB- US : -LSB- ˈvɪzɪˌɡɑːθs -RSB- Visigothi , Wisigothi , Vesi , Visi , Wesi , or Wisi Visigoti -RRB- were the western branches of the nomadic tribes of Germanic peoples referred to collectively as the Goths .
These tribes flourished and spread throughout the late Roman Empire in Late Antiquity , or what is known as the Migration Period .
The Visigoths emerged from earlier Gothic groups -LRB- possibly the Thervingi -RRB- who had invaded the Roman Empire beginning in 376 and had defeated the Romans at the Battle of Adrianople in 378 .
Relations between the Romans and the Visigoths were variable , alternately warring with one another and making treaties when convenient .
The Visigoths invaded Italy under Alaric I and sacked Rome in 410 .
After the Visigoths sacked Rome , they began settling down , first in southern Gaul and eventually in Spain and Portugal , where they founded the Visigothic Kingdom and maintained a presence from the 5th to the 8th centuries AD .
The Visigoths first settled in southern Gaul as foederati of the Romans -- a relationship established in 418 .
However , they soon fell out with their Roman hosts -LRB- for reasons that are now obscure -RRB- and established their own kingdom with its capital at Toulouse .
They next extended their authority into Hispania at the expense of the Suebi and Vandals .
In 507 , however , their rule in Gaul was ended by the Franks under Clovis I , who defeated them in the Battle of Vouillé .
After that , the Visigoth kingdom was limited to Hispania , and they never again held territory north of the Pyrenees other than Septimania .
A small , elite group of Visigoths came to dominate the governance of that region at the expense of those who had previously ruled there , particularly in the Byzantine province of Spania and the Kingdom of the Suebi .
In or around 589 , the Visigoths under Reccared I converted from Arianism to Nicene Christianity , gradually adopting the culture of their Hispano-Roman subjects .
Their legal code , the Visigothic Code -LRB- completed in 654 -RRB- abolished the longstanding practice of applying different laws for Romans and Visigoths .
Once legal distinctions were no longer being made between Romani and Gothi , they became known collectively as Hispani .
In the century that followed , the region was dominated by the Councils of Toledo and the episcopacy .
-LRB- Little else is known about the Visigoths ' history during the 7th century , since records are relatively sparse . -RRB-
In 711 or 712 , a force of invading African Moors defeated the Visigoths in the Battle of Guadalete .
Their king and many members of their governing elite were killed , and their kingdom rapidly collapsed .
Gothic identity survived , however , especially in Marca Hispanica and the Kingdom of Asturias , which had been founded by the Visigothic nobleman Pelagius of Asturias after his victory over the Moors at the Battle of Covadonga .
During their governance of the Kingdom of Hispania , the Visigoths built several churches that survive .
They also left many artifacts , which have been discovered in increasing numbers by archaeologists in recent times .
The Treasure of Guarrazar of votive crowns and crosses is the most spectacular .
They founded the only new cities in western Europe from the fall of the Western half of the Roman Empire until the rise of the Carolingian dynasty .
Many Visigothic names are still in use in modern Spanish and Portuguese .
Their most notable legacy , however , was the Visigothic Code , which served , among other things , as the basis for court procedure in most of Christian Iberia until the Late Middle Ages , centuries after the demise of the kingdom .