Volleyball is a team sport in which two teams of six players are separated by a net .
Each team tries to score points by grounding a ball on the other team 's court under organized rules .
It has been a part of the official program of the Summer Olympic Games since 1964 .
The complete rules are extensive .
But simply , play proceeds as follows : a player on one of the teams begins a ` rally ' by serving the ball -LRB- tossing or releasing it and then hitting it with a hand or arm -RRB- , from behind the back boundary line of the court , over the net , and into the receiving team 's court .
The receiving team must not let the ball be grounded within their court .
The team may touch the ball up to 3 times but individual players may not touch the ball twice consecutively .
Typically , the first two touches are used to set up for an attack , an attempt to direct the ball back over the net in such a way that the serving team is unable to prevent it from being grounded in their court .
The rally continues , with each team allowed as many as three consecutive touches , until either -LRB- 1 -RRB- : a team makes a kill , grounding the ball on the opponent 's court and winning the rally ; or -LRB- 2 -RRB- : a team commits a fault and loses the rally .
The team that wins the rally is awarded a point , and serves the ball to start the next rally .
A few of the most common faults include :
causing the ball to touch the ground or floor outside the opponents ' court or without first passing over the net ;
catching and throwing the ball ;
double hit : two consecutive contacts with the ball made by the same player ;
four consecutive contacts with the ball made by the same team ;
net foul : touching the net during play ;
foot fault : the foot crosses over the boundary line when serving .
The ball is usually played with the hands or arms , but players can legally strike or push -LRB- short contact -RRB- the ball with any part of the body .
A number of consistent techniques have evolved in volleyball , including spiking and blocking -LRB- because these plays are made above the top of the net , the vertical jump is an athletic skill emphasized in the sport -RRB- as well as passing , setting , and specialized player positions and offensive and defensive structures .