The Washington Monument is an obelisk on the National Mall in Washington , D.C. , built to commemorate George Washington , once commander-in-chief of the Continental Army and the first President of the United States .
Located almost due east of the Reflecting Pool and the Lincoln Memorial , the monument , made of marble , granite , and bluestone gneiss , is both the world 's tallest stone structure and the world 's tallest obelisk , standing 554 ft tall according to the National Geodetic Survey -LRB- measured 2013 -- 14 -RRB- or 555 ft tall according to the National Park Service -LRB- measured 1884 -RRB- .
It is the tallest monumental column in the world if all are measured above their pedestrian entrances .
Construction of the monument began in 1848 , and was halted from 1854 to 1877 due to a lack of funds , a struggle for control over the Washington National Monument Society , and the intervention of the American Civil War .
Although the stone structure was completed in 1884 , internal ironwork , the knoll , and other finishing touches were not completed until 1888 .
A difference in shading of the marble , visible approximately 150 ft or 27 % up , shows where construction was halted and later resumed with marble from a different source .
The original design was by Robert Mills , but he did not include his proposed colonnade due to a lack of funds , proceeding only with a bare obelisk .
Despite many proposals to embellish the obelisk , only its original flat top was altered to a pointed marble pyramidion , in 1884 .
The cornerstone was laid on July 4 , 1848 ; the first stone was laid atop the unfinished stump on ; the capstone was set on ; the completed monument was dedicated on ; and officially opened .
Upon completion , it became the world 's tallest structure , a title previously held by the Cologne Cathedral .
The monument held this designation until 1889 , when the Eiffel Tower was completed in Paris , France .
The monument was damaged during the 2011 Virginia earthquake and Hurricane Irene in the same year and remained closed to the public while the structure was assessed and repaired .
After 32 months of repairs , the National Park Service and the Trust for the National Mall reopened the Washington Monument to visitors on .
As of September 2016 , the monument has been closed indefinitely due to reliability issues with the current elevator system .
On December 2 , 2016 , the National Park Service announced that the monument would be closed until 2019 in order to modernize the elevator .
The $ 2 to 3 million project will correct the elevator 's ongoing mechanical , electrical and computer issues , which have shuttered the monument since August 17 .
The National Park Service has also requested funding in its FY 2017 President 's Budget Request to construct a permanent screening facility for the Washington Monument .
The Washington Monument is expected to re-open to visitors in 2019 .