Water is a transparent and nearly colorless chemical substance that is the main constituent of Earth 's streams , lakes , and oceans , and the fluids of most living organisms .
Its chemical formula is H2O , meaning that its molecule contains one oxygen and two hydrogen atoms , that are connected by covalent bonds .
Water strictly refers to the liquid state of that substance , that prevails at standard ambient temperature and pressure ; but it often refers also to its solid state -LRB- ice -RRB- or its gaseous state -LRB- steam or water vapor -RRB- .
It also occurs in nature as snow , glaciers , ice packs and icebergs , clouds , fog , dew , aquifers , and atmospheric humidity .
Water covers 71 % of the Earth 's surface .
It is vital for all known forms of life .
On Earth , 96.5 % of the planet 's crust water is found in seas and oceans , 1.7 % in groundwater , 1.7 % in glaciers and the ice caps of Antarctica and Greenland , a small fraction in other large water bodies , and 0.001 % in the air as vapor , clouds -LRB- formed of ice and liquid water suspended in air -RRB- , and precipitation .
Only 2.5 % of this water is freshwater , and 98.8 % of that water is in ice -LRB- excepting ice in clouds -RRB- and groundwater .
Less than 0.3 % of all freshwater is in rivers , lakes , and the atmosphere , and an even smaller amount of the Earth 's freshwater -LRB- 0.003 % -RRB- is contained within biological bodies and manufactured products .
A greater quantity of water is found in the earth 's interior .
Water on Earth moves continually through the water cycle of evaporation and transpiration -LRB- evapotranspiration -RRB- , condensation , precipitation , and runoff , usually reaching the sea .
Evaporation and transpiration contribute to the precipitation over land .
Large amounts of water are also chemically combined or adsorbed in hydrated minerals .
Safe drinking water is essential to humans and other lifeforms even though it provides no calories or organic nutrients .
Access to safe drinking water has improved over the last decades in almost every part of the world , but approximately one billion people still lack access to safe water and over 2.5 billion lack access to adequate sanitation .
There is a clear correlation between access to safe water and gross domestic product per capita .
However , some observers have estimated that by 2025 more than half of the world population will be facing water-based vulnerability .
A report , issued in November 2009 , suggests that by 2030 , in some developing regions of the world , water demand will exceed supply by 50 % .
Water plays an important role in the world economy .
Approximately 70 % of the freshwater used by humans goes to agriculture .
Fishing in salt and fresh water bodies is a major source of food for many parts of the world .
Much of long-distance trade of commodities -LRB- such as oil and natural gas -RRB- and manufactured products is transported by boats through seas , rivers , lakes , and canals .
Large quantities of water , ice , and steam are used for cooling and heating , in industry and homes .
Water is an excellent solvent for a wide variety of chemical substances ; as such it is widely used in industrial processes , and in cooking and washing .
Water is also central to many sports and other forms of entertainment , such as swimming , pleasure boating , boat racing , surfing , sport fishing , and diving .