West Virginia -LSB- wɛst_vərˈdʒɪnjə -RSB- is a state located in the Appalachian region of the Southern United States .
It is bordered by Virginia to the southeast , Kentucky to the southwest , Ohio to the northwest , Pennsylvania to the north -LRB- and , slightly , east -RRB- , and Maryland to the northeast .
West Virginia is the 9th smallest by area , is ranked 38th in population , and has the second lowest household income of the 50 United States .
The capital and largest city is Charleston .
West Virginia became a state following the Wheeling Conventions of 1861 , in which delegates from some Unionist counties of northwestern Virginia decided to break away from Virginia during the American Civil War , although they included many secessionist counties in the new state .
West Virginia was admitted to the Union on June 20 , 1863 , and was a key Civil War border state .
West Virginia was the only state to form by separating from a Confederate state , the first to separate from any state since Maine separated from Massachusetts , and was one of two states formed during the American Civil War -LRB- the other being Nevada -RRB- .
The Census Bureau and the Association of American Geographers classify West Virginia as part of the Southern United States .
The northern panhandle extends adjacent to Pennsylvania and Ohio , with the West Virginia cities of Wheeling and Weirton just across the border from the Pittsburgh metropolitan area , while Bluefield is less than 70 mi from North Carolina .
Huntington in the southwest is close to the states of Ohio and Kentucky , while Martinsburg and Harpers Ferry in the Eastern Panhandle region are considered part of the Washington metropolitan area , in between the states of Maryland and Virginia .
The unique position of West Virginia means that it is often included in several geographical regions , including the Mid-Atlantic , the Upland South , and the Southeastern United States .
It is the only state that is entirely within the area served by the Appalachian Regional Commission ; the area is commonly defined as `` Appalachia '' .
The state is noted for its mountains and rolling hills , its historically significant logging and coal mining industries , and its political and labor history .
It is one of the most densely karstic areas in the world , making it a choice area for recreational caving and scientific research .
The karst lands contribute to much of the state 's cool trout waters .
It is also known for a wide range of outdoor recreational opportunities , including skiing , whitewater rafting , fishing , hiking , backpacking , mountain biking , rock climbing , and hunting .