Thomas Woodrow Wilson -LRB- December 28 , 1856 -- February 3 , 1924 -RRB- was an American politician and academic who served as the 28th President of the United States from 1913 to 1921 .
A member of the Democratic Party , Wilson served as the President of Princeton University from 1902 to 1910 and as Governor of New Jersey from 1911 to 1913 .
Wilson 's victory in the 1912 presidential election made him the first Southerner elected to the presidency since Zachary Taylor in 1848 , and Wilson became a leading force in the Progressive Movement .
He also led the United States during World War I , establishing an activist foreign policy known as `` Wilsonianism . ''
He was a major leader at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 , where he championed the proposed League of Nations .
However , he was unable to obtain Senate approval for U.S. membership .
He suffered debilitating strokes in September 1919 ; after that his wife and staff handled most of his presidential duties .
Born in Staunton , Virginia , he spent his early years in Augusta , Georgia and Columbia , South Carolina .
His father was a leading Presbyterian in the Confederacy during the Civil War , and Wilson was always a devout Presbyterian and a proud Southerner .
He took a law degree and then one of the first PhDs in political science awarded by Johns Hopkins University .
He served as a professor and scholar at various institutions before being selected as President of Princeton University , a position he held from 1902 to 1910 .
Wilson became a notable academic , arguing for the superiority of the parliamentary system .
He was associated with Grover Cleveland and the conservative Bourbon Democrats until 1910 , when he moved left .
With the help of state Democratic bosses , Wilson won the 1910 Democratic nomination for governor of New Jersey , and was elected as a fresh reformer , holding office from 1911 to 1913 .
He overthrew the same bosses and gained a national reputation .
He won the 1912 Democratic presidential nomination after forty-six rounds of balloting , with support from William Jennings Bryan .
Former President Theodore Roosevelt 's third party candidacy split the Republican Party , which re-nominated incumbent President William Howard Taft .
Wilson won the 1912 election with a plurality of the popular vote and a large majority in the electoral college .
Leading the Congress that was now in Democratic hands , he oversaw the passage of progressive legislative policies unparalleled until the New Deal in 1933 .
The Federal Reserve Act , Federal Trade Commission Act , the Clayton Antitrust Act , and the Federal Farm Loan Act were some of these new policies .
Having taken office one month after ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment , Wilson called a special session of Congress , whose work culminated in the Revenue Act of 1913 , introducing an income tax and lowering tariffs .
Through passage of the Adamson Act that imposed an 8-hour workday for railroads , he averted a railroad strike and an ensuing economic crisis .
Upon the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , Wilson maintained a policy of neutrality , while pursuing a more aggressive policy in dealing with Mexico 's civil war .
Wilson staffed his government with Southern Democrats who implemented racial segregation at the Treasury , Navy and other Federal offices .
In the presidential election of 1916 , Wilson faced former New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes .
By a narrow margin , he became the first Democrat since Andrew Jackson elected to two consecutive terms .
In April 1917 , when Germany had resumed unrestricted submarine warfare and sent the Zimmermann Telegram , Wilson asked Congress to declare war in order to make `` the world safe for democracy . ''
The United States conducted military operations alongside the Allies , although without a formal alliance .
During the war , Wilson focused on diplomacy and financial considerations , leaving military strategy to the generals , especially General John J. Pershing .
Through the Selective Service Act , conscription sent 10,000 freshly trained soldiers to France per day by the summer of 1918 .
On the home front , he raised income taxes , borrowing billions of dollars through the public 's purchase of Liberty Bonds .
He set up the War Industries Board , promoted labor union cooperation , regulated agriculture and food production through the Lever Act , and took direct control of the nation 's railroad system .
Wilson asked Congress for what became the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918 , suppressing anti-draft activists .
The crackdown was intensified by his Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer to include expulsion of non-citizen radicals during the First Red Scare of 1919 -- 1920 .
Early in 1918 , Wilson issued his principles for an end to the war , the Fourteen Points , and in 1919 , following an armistice , he traveled to Paris , promoting the formation of a League of Nations and concluding the Treaty of Versailles .
Following his return from Europe , Wilson embarked on a nationwide tour in 1919 to campaign for the treaty , but suffered a severe stroke .
The treaty was met with serious concern by Senate Republicans , and the Senate ultimately rejected the treaty .
Due to his stroke , Wilson secluded himself in the White House , disability having diminished his power and influence , and he failed in his bid to win re-nomination at the 1920 Democratic National Convention .
Wilson retired at the end of his presidency , and he died in 1924 .