X-Men : Days of Future Past is a 2014 American superhero film based on the fictional X-Men characters that appear in Marvel Comics .
Directed by Bryan Singer , it is the seventh installment of the X-Men film series and acts as a sequel to both 2006 's X-Men : The Last Stand and 2011 's X-Men : First Class .
The story , inspired by the 1981 Uncanny X-Men storyline `` Days of Future Past '' by Chris Claremont and John Byrne , focuses on two time periods , with Wolverine traveling back in time to 1973 to change history and prevent an event that results in doom for both humans and mutants .
The film features an ensemble cast , including Hugh Jackman , James McAvoy , Michael Fassbender , Jennifer Lawrence , Halle Berry , Anna Paquin , Ellen Page , Peter Dinklage , Ian McKellen and Patrick Stewart .
Simon Kinberg wrote the screenplay from a story conceived by Jane Goldman , himself , and Matthew Vaughn .
Vaughn had directed First Class and was set to return in Days of Future Past before leaving for Kingsman : The Secret Service .
Thus Singer , who had directed the first two X-Men films , made his return as a director , and brought along most of the crew from those productions .
With a budget of $ 200 million , principal photography began in Montreal , Quebec in April 2013 and concluded in August the same year , with additional filming and pick-ups taking place in November 2013 and February 2014 .
Twelve companies handled the visual effects .
X-Men : Days of Future Past premiered in New York City on May 10 , 2014 , and was theatrically released on May 23 .
It became the best-reviewed film in the X-Men film series released thus far -LRB- surpassed only by Logan in 2017 -RRB- , being praised for its story , visual effects , action scenes , acting and thematic elements .
During its theatrical run , the film earned over $ 747 million worldwide , making it the 6th highest grossing film of 2014 , as well as the second highest-grossing film in the series behind Deadpool .
The film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects , making it the first X-Men film to be nominated for an Oscar .
A sequel , X-Men : Apocalypse , was released on May 27 , 2016 .