Xbox One is a line of home video game consoles developed by Microsoft .
Announced in May 2013 , it is the successor to Xbox 360 and the third console in the Xbox family .
It was first released in North America , parts of Europe , Australia , and Brazil in November 2013 , and in Japan , China , and other European countries in September 2014 .
It is the first Xbox game console to be released in China , specifically in the Shanghai Free-Trade Zone .
Microsoft marketed the device as an `` all-in-one entertainment system '' .
The Xbox One line mainly competes against consoles such as Sony 's PlayStation 4 and Nintendo 's Wii U as part of the eighth generation of video game consoles .
Moving away from its predecessor 's PowerPC-based architecture , Xbox One marks a shift back to the x86 architecture used in the original Xbox ; it features an AMD Accelerated Processing Unit -LRB- APU -RRB- built around the x86-64 instruction set .
Xbox One 's controller was redesigned over the Xbox 360 's , with a redesigned body , D-pad and triggers capable of delivering directional haptic feedback .
The console places an increased emphasis on cloud computing , as well as social networking features , and the ability to record and share video clips or screenshots from gameplay , or live-stream directly to streaming services such as Mixer and Twitch .
Games can also be played off-console via a local area network on supported Windows 10 devices .
The console can play Blu-ray Disc , and overlay live television programming from an existing set-top box or a digital tuner for digital terrestrial television with an enhanced program guide .
The console optionally included a redesigned Kinect sensor , marketed as the `` Kinect 2.0 '' , providing improved motion tracking and voice recognition for use in its graphical user interface -LRB- GUI -RRB- and games .
Xbox One received mostly positive reception for its refined controller design , multimedia features , and voice navigation .
Its quieter and cooler design was praised for making the console more reliable than its predecessor on-launch , but the console was generally criticized for running games at a technically lower graphical level than the PlayStation 4 .
Its original user interface was panned for being nonintuitive , although changes made to it and other aspects of the console 's software post-launch received positive reception .
Its Kinect received praise for its improved motion-tracking accuracy , its face recognition logins , and its voice commands .
In August 2016 , Microsoft released a refreshed Xbox One model known as Xbox One S ; it has a streamlined design , native support for 4K video playback and upscaling , and HDR10 high-dynamic-range color .
It was praised for its smaller size , its on-screen visual improvements , and its lack of an external power supply , but its regressions such as the lack of a native Kinect port were noted .
A future hardware revision codenamed `` Project Scorpio '' is scheduled for late-2017 ; it will feature major hardware upgrades focused on enabling 4K gameplay and support for virtual reality hardware , and will be backward compatible with all existing Xbox One software and hardware .