Xi Jinping -LRB- -LSB- - cmnɕǐ tɕìn.pʰǐŋ -RSB- , ; born 15 June 1953 -RRB- is the current General Secretary of the Communist Party of China , President of the People 's Republic of China , and Chairman of the Central Military Commission .
As Xi holds the top offices of the party and the military , in addition to being the head of state through the office of the president , he is sometimes referred to as China 's `` Paramount Leader '' and recognized by the party as its leadership `` core '' .
As General Secretary , Xi holds an ex-officio seat on the Politburo Standing Committee , China 's top decision-making body .
The son of Communist veteran Xi Zhongxun , Xi Jinping rose through the ranks politically in China 's coastal provinces .
Xi was governor of Fujian from 1999 to 2002 , and governor , then party secretary of neighboring Zhejiang province from 2002 to 2007 .
Following the dismissal of Chen Liangyu , Xi was transferred to Shanghai as party secretary for a brief period in 2007 .
Xi joined the Politburo Standing Committee and central secretariat in October 2007 , spending the next five years as Hu Jintao 's presumed successor .
Xi was vice-president from 2008 to 2013 and Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission from 2010 to 2012 .
Since assuming power , Xi has attempted to legitimize the authority of the Communist Party by introducing far-ranging measures to enforce party discipline and to ensure internal unity .
He initiated an unprecedented and far-reaching campaign against corruption , leading to the downfall of prominent incumbent and retired officials .
Xi has also imposed further restrictions over civil society and ideological discourse , advocating the concept of `` internet sovereignty '' .
Considered the central figure of the People 's Republic 's fifth generation of leadership , Xi has significantly centralized institutional power by taking on a wide range of leadership positions , including chairing the newly formed National Security Commission , as well as new steering committees on economic and social reforms , military reform , and the Internet .
Xi has called for further market economic reforms , for governing according to the law and for strengthening legal institutions , with an emphasis on individual and national aspirations under the neologism `` Chinese Dream '' .
Xi has also championed a more assertive foreign policy , particularly with regards to Sino-Japanese relations , China 's claims in the South China Sea , and its role as a leading advocate of free trade and globalization .
He has also sought to expand China 's regional influence through the One Belt , One Road initiative , played a leading role in the fight against climate change , and invested heavily in energy and natural resources .