Yale University is an American private Ivy League research university in New Haven , Connecticut .
Founded in 1701 , it is the third-oldest institution of higher education in the United States .
Chartered by Connecticut Colony , the `` Collegiate School '' was established by clergy in Saybrook Colony to educate Congregationalist ministers .
It moved to New Haven in 1716 , and shortly after was renamed Yale College in recognition of a gift from British East India Company governor Elihu Yale .
Originally restricted to theology and sacred languages , the curriculum began to incorporate humanities and sciences by the time of the American Revolution .
In the 19th century the school introduced graduate and professional instruction , awarding the first Ph.D. in the United States in 1861 and organizing as a university in 1887 .
Its faculty and student populations grew rapidly after 1890 with rapid expansion of the physical campus and scientific research .
Yale is organized into fourteen constituent schools : the original undergraduate college , the Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences , and twelve professional schools .
While the university is governed by the Yale Corporation , each school 's faculty oversees its curriculum and degree programs .
In addition to a central campus in downtown New Haven , the University owns athletic facilities in western New Haven , a campus in West Haven , Connecticut , and forest and nature preserves throughout New England .
The university 's assets include an endowment valued at $ 25.4 billion as of June 2016 , the second largest of any U.S. educational institution .
The Yale University Library , serving all constituent schools , holds more than 15 million volumes and is the third-largest academic library in the United States .
Yale College undergraduates follow a liberal arts curriculum with departmental majors and are organized into a social system of residential colleges .
Almost all faculty teach undergraduate courses , more than 2,000 of which are offered annually .
Students compete intercollegiately as the Yale Bulldogs in the NCAA Division I -- Ivy League .
Yale has graduated many notable alumni , including five U.S. Presidents , 19 U.S. Supreme Court Justices , 20 living billionaires , and many heads of state .
In addition , Yale has graduated hundreds of members of Congress and many high-level U.S. diplomats .
57 Nobel laureates , 5 Fields Medalists , 78 MacArthur Fellows , 247 Rhodes Scholars , and 119 Marshall Scholars have been affiliated with the University .