In Chinese philosophy , yin and yang -LRB- also yin -- yang or yin yang , yīnyáng `` dark -- bright '' -RRB- describe how seemingly opposite or contrary forces may actually be complementary , interconnected , and interdependent in the natural world , and how they may give rise to each other as they interrelate to one another .
Many tangible dualities -LRB- such as light and dark , fire and water , expanding and contracting -RRB- are thought of as physical manifestations of the duality symbolized by yin and yang .
This duality lies at the origins of many branches of classical Chinese science and philosophy , as well as being a primary guideline of traditional Chinese medicine , and a central principle of different forms of Chinese martial arts and exercise , such as baguazhang , taijiquan -LRB- t ` ai chi -RRB- , and qigong -LRB- Chi Kung -RRB- , as well as appearing in the pages of the I Ching .
Duality is found in many belief systems , but Yin and Yang are parts of a Oneness that is also equated with the Tao .
A term has been coined dualistic-monism or dialectical monism .
Yin and yang can be thought of as complementary -LRB- rather than opposing -RRB- forces that interact to form a dynamic system in which the whole is greater than the assembled parts .
Everything has both yin and yang aspects -LRB- for instance , shadow can not exist without light -RRB- .
Either of the two major aspects may manifest more strongly in a particular object , depending on the criterion of the observation .
The yin yang -LRB- i.e. taijitu symbol -RRB- shows a balance between two opposites with a portion of the opposite element in each section .
In Taoist metaphysics , distinctions between good and bad , along with other dichotomous moral judgments , are perceptual , not real ; so , the duality of yin and yang is an indivisible whole .
In the ethics of Confucianism on the other hand , most notably in the philosophy of Dong Zhongshu -LRB- 2nd century BC -RRB- , a moral dimension is attached to the idea of yin and yang .