`` You Belong with Me '' is a song performed by American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift .
The song was co-written by Swift and Liz Rose and produced by Nathan Chapman with Swift 's aid .
It was released on April 18 , 2009 , by Big Machine Records as the third single from Swift 's second studio album , Fearless -LRB- 2008 -RRB- .
Swift was inspired to write `` You Belong with Me '' after overhearing a male friend of hers arguing with his girlfriend through a phone call ; she continued to develop a story line afterward .
The song contains many pop music elements and its lyrics have Swift desiring an out-of-reach love interest .
The song won Favorite song at 2010 Kids ' Choice Awards , and received nominations for the Grammy Awards for Song of the Year , Record of the Year , and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance .
`` You Belong with Me '' enjoyed commercial success as well ; it became a top ten hit in Australia , Canada , New Zealand , and the United States .
In the United States , the song became Swift 's highest-charting single on the Billboard Hot 100 at the time and has become Swift 's third best-selling single .
It managed to gain the largest crossover radio audience since Faith Hill 's `` Breathe '' did in 2000 .
The single was certified 6 × Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America -LRB- RIAA -RRB- .
The song is one of the best-selling singles worldwide , with worldwide sales of more than 5.1 million units -LRB- according to the IFPI -RRB- .
The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Roman White .
The video featured Swift portraying two characters , a nerd -LRB- the protagonist and narrator -RRB- and a popular girl -LRB- the antagonist and girlfriend -RRB- , while American actor Lucas Till portrayed the male lead .
The video 's plot centers on the protagonist secretively loving the male lead , although he has a girlfriend .
The video won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , but during Swift 's acceptance speech , rapper Kanye West interrupted , protesting in support of Beyoncé .
The incident caused a reaction in the media , with most people coming to Swift 's defense .
The song was performed live at numerous venues , including the 2009 -- 10 Fearless Tour , where it was the opening number .
It was covered by various artists , including Butch Walker and Selena Gomez & the Scene , and parodied by `` Weird Al '' Yankovic .