Yugoslavia -LRB- Jugoslavija / Југославија , Jugoslavija , Југославија -RRB- was a country in Southeast Europe during most of the 20th century .
It came into existence after World War I in 1918 under the name of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes by the merger of the provisional State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs -LRB- itself formed from territories of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire -RRB- with the formerly independent Kingdom of Serbia .
The Serbian royal House of Karađorđević became the Yugoslav royal dynasty .
Yugoslavia gained international recognition on 13 July 1922 at the Conference of Ambassadors in Paris .
The country was named after the South Slavic peoples and constituted their first union , following centuries in which the territories had been part of the Ottoman Empire and Austria-Hungary .
Renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia on 3 October 1929 , it was invaded by the Axis powers on 6 April 1941 .
In 1943 , a Democratic Federal Yugoslavia was proclaimed by the Partisan resistance .
In 1944 , the king recognised it as the legitimate government , but in November 1945 the monarchy was abolished .
Yugoslavia was renamed the Federal People 's Republic of Yugoslavia in 1946 , when a communist government was established .
It acquired the territories of Istria , Rijeka , and Zadar from Italy .
Partisan leader Josip Broz Tito ruled the country as president until his death in 1980 .
In 1963 , the country was renamed again as the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia -LRB- SFRY -RRB- .
The constituent six socialist republics that made up the country were the SR Bosnia and Herzegovina , SR Croatia , SR Macedonia , SR Montenegro , SR Serbia , and SR Slovenia .
Serbia contained two Socialist Autonomous Provinces , Vojvodina and Kosovo , which after 1974 were largely equal to the other members of the federation .
After an economic and political crisis in the 1980s and the rise of nationalism , Yugoslavia broke up along its republics ' borders , at first into five countries , leading to the Yugoslav Wars .
After the breakup , the republics of Serbia and Montenegro formed a reduced federation , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia -LRB- FRY -RRB- , which aspired to the status of sole legal successor to the SFRY , but those claims were opposed by the other former republics .
Eventually , Serbia and Montenegro accepted the opinion of the Badinter Arbitration Committee about shared succession .
Serbia and Montenegro themselves broke up in 2006 and became independent states , while Kosovo proclaimed independence in 2008 .