Zambia -LRB- -LSB- ˈzæmbiə -RSB- -RRB- , officially the Republic of Zambia , is a landlocked country in Southern Africa , neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the north , Tanzania to the north-east , Malawi to the east , Mozambique , Zimbabwe , Botswana and Namibia to the south , and Angola to the west .
The capital city is Lusaka , in the south-central part of Zambia .
The population is concentrated mainly around Lusaka in the south and the Copperbelt Province to the northwest , the core economic hubs of the country .
Originally inhabited by Khoisan peoples , the region was affected by the Bantu expansion of the thirteenth century .
After visits by European explorers in the eighteenth century , Zambia became the British protectorate of Northern Rhodesia towards the end of the nineteenth century .
For most of the colonial period , Zambia was governed by an administration appointed from London with the advice of the British South Africa Company .
On 24 October 1964 , Zambia became independent of the United Kingdom and prime minister Kenneth Kaunda became the inaugural president .
Kaunda 's socialist United National Independence Party -LRB- UNIP -RRB- maintained power from 1964 until 1991 .
Kaunda played a key role in regional diplomacy , cooperating closely with the United States in search of solutions to conflicts in Rhodesia -LRB- Zimbabwe -RRB- , Angola , and Namibia .
From 1972 to 1991 Zambia was a one-party state with the UNIP as the sole legal political party under the motto `` One Zambia , One Nation '' .
Kaunda was succeeded by Frederick Chiluba of the social-democratic Movement for Multi-Party Democracy in 1991 , beginning a period of social-economic growth and government decentralisation .
Levy Mwanawasa , Chiluba 's chosen successor , presided over Zambia from January 2002 until his death in August 2008 , and is credited with campaigns to reduce corruption and increase the standard of living .
After Mwanawasa 's death , Rupiah Banda presided as Acting President before being elected President in 2008 .
Holding office for only three years , Banda stepped down after his defeat in the 2011 elections by Patriotic Front party leader Michael Sata .
Sata died on 28 October 2014 , the second Zambian president to die in office .
Guy Scott served briefly as interim president until new elections were held on 20 January 2015 , in which Edgar Lungu was elected as the sixth President .
In 2010 , the World Bank named Zambia one of the world 's fastest economically reformed countries .
The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa -LRB- COMESA -RRB- is headquartered in Lusaka .